                   Logarithmic Market Scoring Rules for
               Modular Combinatorial Information Aggregation
                                            Robin Hanson ∗
                                        Department of Economics
                                        George Mason University†

                                                January 2002



                                                   Abstract
           In practice, scoring rules elicit good probability estimates from individuals, while betting
       markets elicit good consensus estimates from groups. Market scoring rules combine these fea-
       tures, eliciting estimates from individuals or groups, with groups costing no more than individ-
       uals. Regarding a bet on one event given another event, only logarithmic versions preserve the
       probability of the given event. Logarithmic versions also preserve the conditional probabilities
       of other events, and so preserve conditional independence relations. Given logarithmic rules
       that elicit relative probabilities of base event pairs, it costs no more to elicit estimates on all
       combinations of these base events.

Introduction
In theory, probability elicitation is hard. For expected utility maximizers, choices are jointly de-
termined by utilities and probabilities, and so without additional constraints on utilities or prob-
abilities subjective probabilities cannot be separated from event-dependent utilities (Kadane &
Winkler, 1988). Some sophisticated approaches can in theory overcome this problem (Jaﬀray &
Karni, 1999; Hanson, 2002b). Yet in practice, less sophisticated uses of scoring rules and related
methods are widely and successfully used to elicit informative event probabilities from individuals
in weather forecasting (Murphy & Winkler, 1984), economic forecasting (O’Carroll, 1977), risk
analysis (DeWispelare, Herren, & Clemen, 1995), and the engineering of intelligent computer sys-
tems (Druzdzel & van der Gaag, 1995). Furthermore, simple conversational statements are often
taken as reliable belief elicitations.
    Given an ability to elicit probabilities, in theory it should be easy to induce individuals to
aggregate their information into common estimates.1 Given a ﬁnite state space, Bayesians with
a common prior who repeatedly state their beliefs, and who have common knowledge about pre-
vious statements, must eventually achieve common knowledge of future statements (Geanakoplos
& Polemarchakis, 1982), and thus common estimates (Aumann, 1976). Along the way, Bayesians
  ∗
     For their comments, I thank Chris Hibbert and David Pennock.
   †
     rhanson@gmu.edu http://hanson.gmu.edu 703-993-2326 FAX: 704-993-2323 MSN 1D3, Carow Hall, Fairfax VA
22030
   1
     This can be true even if directly combining probability distributions is more diﬃcult (Genest & Zidek, 1986).


                                                        1
cannot even predict the direction in which others will disagree with them (Hanson, 2002a). Even if
they are tempted to strategically lie along the way, repeatedly paying each Bayesian by a scoring
rule should also eventually produce a Nash equilibrium of this game (Kalai & Lehrer, 1993), and
thus common knowledge of future statements. Similar results apply when common knowledge is
replaced by common belief (Monderer & Samet, 1989), and for “Bayesian wannabes” (Hanson,
1997).
    In practice, however, repeated exchanges of human opinion in conversation do not produce
the degree of convergence that theory predicts for Bayesians (Cowen & Hanson, 2002). Even so,
speculative markets, such as stock, commodities, and futures markets, seem to do a remarkable,
if sometimes incomplete, job of aggregating available relevant information into market prices (Lo,
1997). Betting markets, in particular, create good probability estimates (Hausch, Lo, & Ziemba,
1994). And this seems to be true even though speculation in such markets seems to be irrational
for most participants. For example, orange juice futures prices improve on government weather
forecasts (Roll, 1984). Markets created within Hewlett-Packard Labs beat oﬃcial corporate sales
forecasts 6 out of 8 times, and tied the other time (Plott, 2000). The Iowa Electronic Markets,
which predict U.S. presidential elections, were more accurate than major opinion polls in 451 out
of 591 comparisons (Berg, Nelson, & Rietz, 2001). Even play money markets have done well at
forecasting movie returns and scientiﬁc progress (Pennock, Giles, & Nielsen, 2001).
    Since theory has not been a completely reliable guide here, we might look to the empirical
successes of scoring rules and betting markets, and try to combine the best of these approaches
while avoiding their failings. Simple scoring rules do not induce diﬀerent individuals to form
common estimates, while simple betting markets cannot create price estimates unless several people
coordinate to bet on the same event, and it typically seems irrational to participate. Market scoring
rules, in contrast, act like simple scoring rules when one person estimates an event once, yet can also
act like a subsidized betting market with which many people can and rationally should repeatedly
interact to produce a common estimate.
    With a simple scoring rule, a person reports a probability for each event, and gets paid depending
on that report and the actual event. Market scoring rules are scoring rules where anyone can change
the current report, and be paid according to their new report, as long as he agrees to pay the last
person reporting according to that person’s report. This in eﬀect lets anyone make any inﬁnitesimal
fair bet at the odds in the last report, and make any integral of such bets through changing betting
odds. The cost to create a market scoring rule depends only on the informativeness of the last
report given it, realtive to its starting position, and does not otherwise depend on how often or
how many people use it. In contrast with a standard betting market, rational agents should expect
a positive proﬁt from participating, and do not need to ﬁnd another person willing to make a
matching bet.
    There are a vast number of events about which one might want probability estimates. There
are not only many simple events, but there are far more possible combinations of these simple
events. How does the cost of a market scoring rule depend on the number of events it covers? Also,
how modular can making changes be? That is, if diﬀerent people specialize in estimating diﬀerent
events, how easily can each person make changes to estimates where they think they have expertise,
while minimizing unintended changes to other estimates?
    These considerations reﬂect favorably on logarithmic versions of market scoring rules. Once
one has paid to create a logarithmic rule on some base set of event pairs, there is no additional
cost to having that rule apply to all possible combinations of those base events. Furthermore, if


                                                  2
someone makes a bet with a logarithmic rule on the conditional probability of one event given
another, with a logarithmic rule the probability of the given event does not change, nor do the
conditional probabilities of further events. Logarithmic rules thus only change the probabilities of
events where the person betting took a risk. This supports the use of conditional independence
relations, a popular mechanism humans use to manage the complexity of large probability spaces.
With logarithmic rules, bets on some events do not change conditional independence relations
between other events.
    For example, given a logarithmic rule that induces an estimate of the chance of rain Monday,
the chance of rain Tuesday, and the chance of rain Wednesday, it costs no more to also induce
estimates such as whether it will rain Tuesday and Wednesday given that it rains Monday. And
if someone bets that it will rain Tuesday given that it rains Monday, this bet will not change the
estimated chance of rain Monday. If current estimates say that the chance of rain Wednesday is
independent of Monday’s chance, given Tuesday’s chance, a bet on rain Tuesday given rain Monday
also will not change this independence relation.
    This paper will ﬁrst review scoring rules, and then discuss market scoring rules, their costs, and
their modularity.


Scoring Rules
Consider an expected-utility maximizing agent with subjective beliefs pi regarding a complete set
                               
of I disjoint events i, where i pi = 1. This agent might be paid a cash amount x according to a
proper scoring rule xi = si (r) (Savage, 1971). Here xi is the cash payment if i turns out to be the
actual event, ri is the probability the agent reports for the event i, and r = {ri}i is the full report.
When s = {si }i constitutes a proper2 scoring rule, an agent who sets his reports ri to maximize
his expected monetary payoﬀ will honestly report ri = pi . That is,
                                                                                  
                          
                          p = argmax r        pi xi =           pi si (r) given       ri = 1.
                                           i             i                          i

Expected monetary payoﬀ will be maximized by risk-neutral agents with event-independent utility.
Other agents can also be induced to maximize an expected monetary payoﬀ.3 Scoring rules can
also give agents incentives to acquire information they would not otherwise possess (Clemen, 2002).
    First and second order conditions for this maximization are that for all events j,

                                                    
                                           λ =           pi j si (p)                                          (1)
                                                     i
                                                    
                                           0 ≥           pi j j si (p)                                       (2)
                                                     i

where λ is a Lagrange multiplier, and j is a partial derivative operator with respect to component
j. Diﬀerentiating this ﬁrst order condition with respect to pk , and applying k j = j k , gives
   2
    For a non-proper scoring rule, other reports also maximize an agent’s expected payoﬀ.
   3
    Agents paid in tickets for a lottery with extreme consequences should maximize expected payoﬀ if their utilities
approach common lower and upper bounds, (Jaﬀray & Karni, 1999). Bayesians paid in lottery tickets after playing a
certain insurance game should maximize their expected payoﬀ relative to their objective beliefs, which are what they
would believe had they updated a known common prior with their further personal information (Hanson, 2002b).


                                                             3
j si = i sj , which implies si (r) = i g(r) for some function g(r) (Williamson, Crowell, & Trotter,
1972). The function g( p) turns out to be the part of an agent’s equilibrium expected payoﬀ that
depends on his report r (Savage, 1971).
    Examples of proper scoring rules include

                                                                 
                            Quadratic     si = ai + bri − b            rj2 /2,
                                                                   j
                                                               
                             Spherical    si = ai + b ri/(         rj2 )1/2,
                                                               j
                          Logarithmic     si = ai + b log(ri),
                                                           ri                   
                           Power Law      si = ai + bα           ρα−2
                                                                  i   dρi − b        rjα
                                                           0                     j

Power law rules are proper scoring rules for α ≥ 1 (Selten, 1998), and both the quadratic (Brier,
1950) and logarithmic rules (Good, 1952) are special cases of this, for α of 2 and 1 respectively.
      The quadratic rule satisﬁes a number of desirable properties (Selten, 1998). The logarithmic
rule also satisﬁes desirable properties (von Holstein, 1970). For example, it is the only rule satisfying
the constraint j si = 1ij νi for some νi (where 1ij = 1 when i = j and 0 otherwise), which implies
si (r) = si (ri), i.e., that an agent’s payoﬀ depends only on the probability he assigned to the actual
event (Savage, 1971). This rule is thus the only one that can simultaneously reward agents and
evaluate them via standard likelihood methods (Winkler, 1969).
      It can be convenient to extend scoring rules si (r), deﬁned so far for normalized r satisfying
                                                                                
    i ri = 1, to cases where      i ri = 1. This can be doneby substituting ri / j rj for pi . For example,
the extended logarithmic rule is si = ai + bi log(ri/ j rj ). An equivalent approach is to require,
                                                                                   
for all positive α, that s(αr) = s(r). This implies 0 ≤ i i g and 0 = i pi i j g, and that
                                                                                                     
λ = 0 in equation 1. For example, for the extended logarithmic rule, g(r) = b i ri log(ri/ j rj ).


Market Scoring Rules
In many existing markets, all trades are made with one or a few central actors called market makers.
These actors always have public oﬀers to buy or to sell, and update these prices in response to trades.
Human market makers have been found to do as well as the standard double auction market
form at aggregating information (Krahnen & Weber, 1999). For the price of a modest subsidy,
automated market makers can also play this role in supporting trade. For example, automated
market makers have been used successfully by the Hollywood Stock Exchange (www.hsx.com) to
promote speculation on the prospects of thousands of movies and movie stars.
    It has long been known that in one dimension, allowing an agent to interact with a proper
scoring rules is equivalent to allowing him to choose a quantity from a continuous oﬀer demand
schedule (Savage, 1971). This paper shows how this equivalence also holds in higher dimensions.
A simple scoring rule variation, the market scoring rule, acts like a continuous automatic market
maker with which an arbitrary number of agents can have an arbitrary number of interactions, at
no additional cost over that of the one last interaction.
    For any scoring rule si (r), an agent should voluntarily agree to accept a payment of the form


                                                     4
                                        xi = Δsi (r, ρ) = si (r) − si (
                                                                          ρ)

for any value of ρ. After all, an agent can ensure himself no eﬀect (x = 0) by setting r = ρ, and
expects a positive (and maximal) proﬁt if he sets r = p = ρ (all normalized). Thus if ρ is repeatedly
set to the last report made, an arbitrary number of agents can be allowed an arbitrary number of
interactions. That is, let agents make their reports rt one at a time to a market scoring rule, where
each report is paid xit = Δsi (rt, rt−1), with r0 an initial reference report. The total cost to pay for
T reports,
                                T
                                             T
                                              
                         xi =         xit =         (si (rt) − s(rt−1)) = si (rT ) − s(r0 ),
                                t=1           t=1

depends only on the initial and ﬁnal reports, and is thus the same as the cost for one ﬁnal report
with the same ﬁnal values ri .
   Not only can the total movement from r0 and rT be split at no additional cost into smaller
movements from rt−1 to rt, each smaller movement can be thought of an integral of inﬁnitesimal
movements dr along a line of changing reports r(t) as t varies continuously. If an agent changes his
                                                                                           
report at a rate of qi = dri/dt, the rate of change in his asset amounts are yi = dxi /dt = j qj j si .
When this agent has beliefs  p, the rate of change in his expected payoﬀ is thus
                d                                               
                     pi xi =   pi yi =   pi   qj j si (r) =   qj (   pi j si (r)).
                dt i         i         i    j                 j      i

 When r =  p, this last term in parentheses is zero according to the ﬁrst order condition (equation 1).
 Thus the ﬁrst order condition is really a local “fair bet” condition, saying that the assets exchanged
 as one changes one’s report are locally a fair (i.e., zero expected value) bet at the current “market”
 prices r. An agent pays assets of the form “Pays $1 if event i holds” in exchange for other assets
 of the same form.
     We can thus think of a market scoring rule as a continuous inventory-based automated market
 maker. Such a market maker has a zero bid-ask spread, at least for inﬁnitesimal trades, has an
 internal state described entirely by its inventory of assets x, and oﬀers an instantaneous price of
                    
       x), where i mi (x) = 1. That is, such a market maker will accept any “fair bet” inﬁnitesimal
p = m(
 trade dx = y dt, such that
                                                    
                                                          yi mi (x) = 0,                              (3)
                                                      i
and accept any ﬁnite trade that is an integral of such inﬁnitesimal trades.
    The main task of any market maker is to extract the information implicit in the trades others
make with it, in order to infer new rational prices (O’Hara, 1997). In response to an inﬁnitesimal
trade, the “inference rule” of a market scoring rule is i mj , which determines fair price changes
                   
via dpi /dt = qi = j yj j mi . This inference rule should satisfy i mi < 0 to compensate for an
expected adverse selection in trades. That is, people buying suggests that the market maker’s price
is probably too low, and people selling suggests the price is too high.
    Market scoring rules produce consensus estimates in the same way that betting markets produce
consensus estimates. While each person is always free to change the current estimate, doing so

                                                              5
 requires taking on more risk, and eventually everyone reaches a limit where they do not want to
 make further changes, at least not until they receive further information. At this point the market
 can be said to be in equilibrium.
    We can extend m(x) to all possible x by requiring that m(  x + α1) = m(
                                                                               x) for all α, where
1 = {1}i. This says that changing the cash reserves of a market maker does not change its prices.
           
 This and i mi = 1 imply

                                            
                                                 i mj   = 0                                           (4)
                                             i
                                            
                                                 j mi = 0.                                            (5)
                                             i

The market maker m   that is equivalent to a particular proper scoring rule then satisﬁes  p =
                
 s(p)) when i pi = 1. The negative sign is because an agent’s gains are the market maker’s
m(−
losses. For example, a logarithmic scoring rule si = ai + b log(pi ) corresponds to an exponential
market maker

                                               exp((−ai − xi )/b)
                                    mi (x) =                       ,                                 (6)
                                                j exp((−aj − xj )/b)

which is characterized by the diﬀerential equation

                                       i mj = −mi (1ij − mj )/b.                                      (7)
Note that an equivalence between these market makers and scoring rules ensures that such a market
maker cannot be exploited for arbitrarily large proﬁts; traders can as a group only take what they
could get by making some report r to the equivalent proper scoring rule.


Costs of Market Scoring Rules
The net assets given to all the agents who interact with a market scoring rule is xi = si (rT ) − s(r0 ),
where rT is the last report made, and r0 is an initial reference report. A principal funding the
scoring rule minimizes her expected payments by setting the initial report to her initial beliefs π,
as in r0 = π.
    In the extreme case where agents eventually become sure of the actual state i, the principal’s
                       
expected payment is i πi Δsi (1i , π), where 1i = {1ij }j . For the logarithmic scoring rule, this
                                                   
maximum expected payment is the entropy, −b i πi log(πi), of the initial distribution π. In less
than extreme cases, if the principal accepts the probabilities estimates of the ﬁnal report, her
expected payment is proportional to the diﬀerence between the entropies of the initial and ﬁnal
                                                                                            
distributions. (For the quadratic scoring rule, the maximum expected payment is b − b i πi2 .) Of
course these cost calculations neglect costs to communicate current prices, to compute price and
asset changes, and to implement transactions.
    A space of possible events i might be constructed as the combinatorial product space of N
                                                                                                  
base variables n, each of which has Vn possible values v. In this case there would be I = n Vn
possible events i, and events could be written as i = {vn }n , where vn is a particular value of base
variable n. If agents reported only on the probability of base variable values, they would make

                                                     6
                      
reports rnv such that v rnv = 1. These base-only reports would have a maximum expected cost of

                pn), where pnv is a sum of pi over events i which satisfy vn = v. For the logarithmic
   nv pnv s̃v (1v , 
scoring rule, the maximum expected cost for the full combinatorial report r = {ri}i , which reports
on the probability of all base variable value combinations, is no more than the cost for the base-only
reports, at least when the parameter b is held constant. After all, the entropy of the full distribution
is no more than the sum of the entropies of the marginal distributions.
    While there is no direct additional ﬁnancial cost to funding combinatorial reports, it remains dif-
ﬁcult to bound the computational cost of updating prices and assets. The computational complexity
of such updates can be large, being worse than polynomial in the worst case (i.e., is NP-complete)
(Cooper, 1990). It remains an open question how to devise market scoring rules that minimize such
computational costs.


Modularity of Market Scoring Rules
There are a vast number of events, combinatorial and otherwise, for which one might want probabil-
ity estimates. An important practical consideration for market scoring rules is thus how well they
help people manage large event spaces, and help people change the estimates where they think they
have relative expertise, while minimizing unintended and uninformed changes to other estimates.
    These considerations can be formalized in terms of how well trade regarding some events pre-
serves conditional independence relations regarding other events. Conditional independence is a
central tool for managing complex probability distributions. For variables A, B, C, we say that in
distribution P , variable A is independent of C given B, and write I(A, B, C), when

                                       P (Ai |Bj Ck ) = P (Ai |Bj )

for all values Ai of A, Bj of B, and Ck of C. (I(A, B, C) implies I(C, B, A)). Humans often
ﬁnd it diﬃcult to state probability estimates, yet can typically express conditional independence
relations quickly and conﬁdently. Humans also change probability estimates more often than they
change estimated independence relations. Such relations typically determine a sparse graph of
related events, producing a vast reduction in the dimensionality of the resulting probability space.
Humans can also frequently locate their areas of relative expertise within such graphs (Pearl, 1988;
Pennock & Wellman, 2000).
    Consider the case of an agent who bets with a market scoring rule, and bets only on the event
A given the event B. That is, this agent gains assets of the form “Pays $1 if A and B hold”, in
trade for assets of the form “Pays $1 if B holds and A does not. Recall that yi = dxi /dt. If we
describe these events A and B as sets of ﬁner events i, this implies yi = yj for all i, j ∈ A ∩ B,
yi = yj for all i, j ∈ Ā ∩ B (where Ā denotes the complement of A), and yi = 0 for all i ∈ B̄. In
general, depending on the particular market scoring rule, such a bet might change any probability
                                                              
estimate pi , and thus change any event probability p(C) = i∈C pi . It seems preferable, however,
for this bet to change as little as possible besides p(A|B) (and of course p(Ā|B) = 1 − p(A|B)).
    That is, the market maker’s inference rule should assume that a new bet on A given B in
general gives it new information only about how the event A might depend on the event B, but
no information on the probability of B, or on events unrelated to how A might depend on B. For
such unrelated events, previous independence relations should be preserved.



                                                    7
    The logarithmic market scoring rule is local in this strong sense. Consider binary variables
A, B, C, with values A, Ā for A, values B, B̄ for B, and values C, C̄ for C. We can prove the
following (proofs in the Appendix).
Theorem 1 Logarithmic rule bets on A given B preserve p(B), and for any event C preserve
p(C|AB), p(C|ĀB), and p(C|B̄), and thus preserve I(A, B, C), and I(B, A, C).
    When there are at least three events i, the inverse also holds; the logarithmic market scoring
rule is the only local rule, even in the weak sense that a bet on A given B preserves p(B). Any rule
that satisﬁes this constraint must do so in the simplest case of only two events. In this simple case,
A = {j}, B = {j, k}, only dxj and dxk are non-zero, and only dpj and dpk should be non-zero. We
can prove that only the logarithmic rule satisﬁes this constraint.
Theorem 2 For I ≥ 3, if yi = 0 for i ∈ {j, k} implies qi = 0 for i ∈ {j, k}, the rule is logarithmic.


    Thus the logarithmic market scoring rule is unique in having a local inference rule. When
someone makes a bet on A conditional on B, and hence takes no risk regarding whether B is true,
all other market scoring rules will sometimes change their estimate of the probability of B. The
logarithmic rule, in contrast, not only preserves p(B), but also preserves p(C|AB), p(C|ĀB), and
p(C|B̄) for all events C.


Conclusion
Simple scoring rules are regularly used to elicit probability estimates from individuals, and more
sophisticated versions are available if needed to overcome risk-aversion and state-dependent utility.
In theory, repeatedly eliciting and announcing individual estimates should be suﬃcient to induce
common estimates, but in practice estimate diﬀerences remain. In practice, however, standard
betting markets do elicit common estimates that seem to aggregate individual information well,
even though participation seems irrational and requires a coordination of trading activity.
    With a simple scoring rule, a person reports a probability for each event, and gets paid depending
on that report and the actual event. Market scoring rules are scoring rules where anyone can change
the oﬃcial report, and be paid according to that new report, as long as they are willing to pay the
last person reporting according to their report. This in eﬀect lets anyone make any inﬁnitesimal
fair bet at the odds in the last report, with no need to ﬁnd another person willing to make a
matching bet, as in ordinary betting markets. Market scoring rules thus combine the advantages of
both simple scoring rules and betting markets, inducing each individual to make an estimate and
inducing common estimates.
    Market scoring rules cost no more to implement than simple scoring rules. The cost does
depend on the number of base events for which probability estimates are invited, but for logarithmic
rules there is no additional cost to elicit estimates on all combinations of these base events. The
logarithmic rule is also unique in making very local inferences from the trades it sees; regarding
a bet on one event given another event, only a logarithmic rule preserves the probability of the
given event. Logarithmic versions also preserve the conditional probabilities of further events, and
so preserve conditional independence relations.
    The computational costs of updating market scoring rules in combinatorial event spaces can be
large, however, and it remains an open question how to best minimize and allocate such costs.

                                                  8
Appendix
Proof of Theorem 1
Logarithmic market scoring rules are exponential market makers which satisfy equation 7. For a
bet on A given B, yi = dxi /dt = 0 for i ∈ B̄. Putting these together, for i ∈ B̄, we have
                                                                             
                      dpi /dt =       yj j mi = −mi          yj 1ij /b + mi       yj mj /b.
                                  j                       j                    j

The ﬁrst sum is zero because yi = 0, and the second sum is zero by the fair bet equation 3. Thus
           
the p(B̄) = i∈B̄ pi does not change, nor does p(B) = 1 − p(B̄).
    According to equation 6, a transition from old prices pi to new prices pi due to asset changes
Δxi satisﬁes pi = pi K exp(−Δxi /b), for some K(Δx). Thus
                                                                            
                 i∈A∩B∩C pi     i∈A∩B∩C pi K exp(−Δxi /b)   i∈A∩B∩C pi
     p (C|AB) =            =                          =           = p(C|AB),
                        p
                   i∈A∩B i             p
                                  i∈A∩B i K exp(−Δxi /b)      i∈A∩B pi

since Δxi is the same everywhere within A ∩ B. Since Δxi is also the same everywhere within
Ā ∩ B and within B̄, p (C|ĀB) = p(C|ĀB) and p (C|B̄) = p(C|B̄) as well. Thus the logarithmic
rule preserves P (C|AB), P (C|ĀB), and P (C|B̄) for any C.
    For a binary variable C, we can write P (A|BC) = P (A|B) as P (A|BC) = P (A|B C̄). For bi-
nary variables, I(A, B, C) (equivalent to I(C, B, A)) requires p(C|AB) = p(C|ĀB) and p(C|AB̄) =
p(C|ĀB̄), and similarly for C̄ instead of C. A logarithmic rule preserves p(C|AB) = p(C|ĀB) by
preserving each side of this equation. A logarithmic rule also preserves both sides of p(C|AB̄) =
p(C|ĀB̄) because, for example, p(C|AB̄) = p(CA|B̄)/P (A|B̄), and both numerator and denomi-
nator here are of the form p(D|B̄) that is preserved. I(B, A, C) (equivalent to I(C, A, B)) requires
p(C|AB) = p(C|AB̄) and p(C|ĀB) = p(C|ĀB̄), and similarly for C̄ instead of C. But all of these
forms are similarly preserved by a logarithmic rule. QED.

Proof of Theorem 2
Let the events j, k be 1, 2. Since we’ve assumed yi = 0 for i ∈ {1, 2}, the fair bet equation (3)
        
requires i yi mi = y1 m1 +y2 m2 = 0. By assumption, when this is true we must have, for i ∈ {1, 2},
0 = qi = y1 1 mi + y2 2 mi . These together imply
                                               1 mi   2 mi
                                                     =       .
                                                m1      m2
Since our choice of 1, 2 as the non-zero variables here was arbitrary, we can call the value of this
equation hi (x). Thus for all i = j we have j mi = mj hi . For i = j we can deﬁne a residual
μi from this expression, as in i mi = hi mi + mi μi (x). Substituting these last two equations into
equation 4 gives hj = −μi mj , which implies that μi = μ, independent of i. This fact allows us to
write, for all i, j,

                                           i mj = μ mi (1ij − mj ).                             (8)




                                                      9
If we knew μ to be a constant function, this would be the same as the diﬀerential equation (7) that
characterizes the logarithmic rule, and so we would be done. We can show that μ is constant by
substituting equation 8 into this equation

                                     k i mj = i k mj ,                                      (9)

which must hold for all functions m. Considering the case i = j = k gives (k μ)/mk = (i μ)/mi,
which implies i μ = mi η for some η(x). Substituting equation 8 into equation 9 and summing
               
over j, k gives k k μ = 0. These together imply ν = 0, which makes μ constant. QED.


References
Aumann, R. (1976). Agreeing to Disagree. The Annals of Statistics, 4 (6), 1236–1239.

Berg, J., Nelson, F., & Rietz, T. (2001). Accuracy and Forecast Standard Error of Prediction
     Markets. Tech. rep., University of Iowa, College of Business Administration.

Brier, G. W. (1950). Veriﬁcation of Forecasts Expressed in Terms of Probability. Monthly Weather
      Review, 78, 1–3.

Clemen, R. T. (2002). Incentive Contracts and Strictly Proper Scoring Rules. Test, 11, 195–217.

Cooper, G. F. (1990). The computational complexity of probabilistic inference using Bayes belief
    networks. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 42, 393–405.

Cowen, T., & Hanson, R. (2002). Are Disagreements Honest?. Tech. rep., George Mason University
    Economics.

DeWispelare, A. R., Herren, L. T., & Clemen, R. T. (1995). The use of probability elicitation in
    the high-level nuclear waste regulation program. International Journal of Forecasting, 11 (1),
    5–24.

Druzdzel, M. J., & van der Gaag, L. C. (1995). Elicitation of Probabilities for Belief Networks:
     Combining Qualitative and Quantitative Information. In Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
     pp. 141–148.

Geanakoplos, J., & Polemarchakis, H. (1982). We Can’t Disagree Forever. Journal of Economic
    Theory, 28, 192–200.

Genest, C., & Zidek, J. V. (1986). Combining Probability Distributions: A Critique and an Anno-
     tated Bibliography. Statistical Science, 1 (1), 114–135.

Good, I. J. (1952). Rational Decisions. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Method-
    ological), 14 (1), 107–114.

Hanson, R. (2002a). Disagreement is Unpredictable. Economics Letters, 77, 365–369.

Hanson, R. (2002b). Eliciting Objective Probabilities via Lottery Insurance Games. Tech. rep.,
     George Mason University Economics. http://hanson.gmu.edu/elicit.pdf.


                                                10
Hanson, R. D. (1997). Four Puzzles in Information and Politics: Product Bans, Informed Voters,
     Social Insurance, and Persistent Disagreement. Ph.D. thesis, California Institute of Technol-
     ogy.

Hausch, D. B., Lo, V. S., & Ziemba, W. T. (1994). Eﬃciencey of Racetrack Betting Markets.
     Academic Press, San Diego.

Jaﬀray, J.-Y., & Karni, E. (1999). Elicitation of Subjective Probabilities When the Initial Endow-
     ment is Unobservable. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 18 (1), 5–20.

Kadane, J. B., & Winkler, R. L. (1988). Separating Probability Elicitation From Utilities. Journal
    of the American Statistical Association, 83 (402), 357–363.

Kalai, E., & Lehrer, E. (1993). Rational learning leads to Nash equilibrium. Econometrica, 61 (5),
      1019–1045.

Krahnen, J. P., & Weber, M. (1999). Does information aggregation depend on market structure?
     Market makers vs. double auction. Zeitschrift fur Wirtschaftsund Sozialwissenschaften, 119,
     1–22.

Lo, A. W. (1997). Market eﬃciency: Stock market behaviour in theory and practice. Elgar, Lyme.

Monderer, D., & Samet, D. (1989). Approximating Common Knowledge with Common Beliefs.
    Games and Economic Behavior, 1, 170–190.

Murphy, A. H., & Winkler, R. L. (1984). Probability Forecasting in Meterology. Journal of the
    American Statistical Association, 79 (387), 489–500.

O’Carroll, F. M. (1977). Subjective Probabilities and Short-Term Economic Forecasts: An Empir-
     ical Investigation. Applied Statistics, 26 (3), 269–278.

O’Hara, M. (1997). Market Microstructure Theory. Blackwell.

Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference.
      Morgan Kauﬀmann, San Mateo, California.

Pennock, D. M., Giles, C. L., & Nielsen, F. A. (2001). The Real Power of Artiﬁcial Markets.
     Science, 291, 987–988.

Pennock, D. M., & Wellman, M. P. (2000).            Compact Secutiries Markets for Pareto
     Optimal Reallocation of Risk.      In Proceedings of the Sixteenth Conference on Un-
     certainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 481–488 San Francisco. Morgan Kaufmann.
     http://rome.exp.sis.pitt.edu/UAI/Abstract.asp?articleID=56.

Plott, C. R. (2000). Markets as Information Gathering Tools. Southern Economic Journal, 67 (1),
      2–15.

Roll, R. (1984). Orange Juice and Weather. American Economic Review, 74 (5), 861–880.

Savage, L. J. (1971). Elicitation of Personal Probabilities and Expectations. Journal of the Amer-
     ican Statistical Association, 66 (336), 783–801.

                                               11
Selten, R. (1998). Axiomatic Characterization of the Quadratic Scoring Rule. Experimental Eco-
      nomics, 1 (1), 43–62.

von Holstein, C.-A. S. S. (1970). Measurement of Subjective Probability. Acta Psychologica, 34,
     146–159.

Williamson, R., Crowell, R., & Trotter, H. (1972). Calculus of Vector Functions (Third edition).
      Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs, New Jersey.

Winkler, R. L. (1969). Scoring Rules and the Evaluation of Probability Assessors. Journal of the
    American Statistical Association, 64 (327), 1073–1078.




                                              12
