The Bargaining Problem
Author(s): John F. Nash, Jr.
Source: Econometrica, Vol. 18, No. 2 (Apr., 1950), pp. 155-162
Published by: The Econometric Society
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/1907266
Accessed: 25-09-2018 16:50 UTC


JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.


Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms




                 The Econometric Society is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access
                 to Econometrica




                                This content downloaded from 165.82.98.155 on Tue, 25 Sep 2018 16:50:16 UTC
                                                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                     THE BARGAINING PROBLEM1

                             BY JoHN F. NASH, JR.

      A new treatment is presented of a classical economic problem, one
   which occurs in many forms, as bargaining, bilateral monopoly, etc.
   It may also be regarded as a nonzero-sum two-person game. In this
   treatment a few general assumptions are made concerning the behavior
   of a single individual and of a group of two individuals in certain eco-
   nomic environments. From these, the solution (in the sense of this paper)
   of the classical problem may be obtained. In the terms of game theory,
   values are found for the game.

                                   INTRODUCTION

A TWO-PERSON bargaining situation involves two individuals who have
the opportunity to collaborate for mutual benefit in more than one way.
In the simpler case, which is the one considered in this paper, no action
taken by one of the individuals without the consent of the other can
affect the well-being of the other one.
  The economic situations of monopoly versus monopsony, of state
trading between two nations, and of negotiation between employer and
labor union may be regarded as bargaining problems. It is the purpose of
this paper to give a theoretical discussion of this problem and to obtain
a definite "solution"-making, of course, certain idealizations in order
to do so. A "solution" here means a determination of the amount of
satisfaction each individual should expect to get from the situation, or,
rather, a determination of how much it should be worth to each of these
individuals to have this opportunity to bargain.
  This is the classical problem of exchange and, more specifically, of
bilateral monopoly as treated by Cournot, Bowley, Tintner, Fellner,
and others. A different approach is suggested by von Neumann and
Morgenstern in Theory of Games and Economic Behavior2 which permits
the identification of this typical exchange situation with a nonzero sum
two-person game.
  In general terms, we idealize the bargaining problem by assuming that
the two individuals are highly rational, that each can accurately compare
his desires for various things, that they are equal in bargaining skill,
and that each has full knowledge of the tastes and preferences of the
other.

   I The author wishes to acknowledge the assistance of Professors von Neu-
mann and Morgenstern who read the original form of the paper and gave helpful
advice as to the presentation.
  2 John von Neumann and Oskar M\orgenstern, Theory of Games and Economic
Behavior, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1944 (Second Edition, 1947),
pp. 15-31.
                                          155




      This content downloaded from 165.82.98.155 on Tue, 25 Sep 2018 16:50:16 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
156     JOHN           F.    NASH,           JR.



  In order to give a theoretical treatment of bargaining situations we
abstract from the situation to form a mathematical model in terms of
which to develop the theory.
  In making our treatment of bargaining we employ a numerical utility,
of the type developed in Theory of Games, to express the preferences,
or tastes, of each individual engaged in bargaining. By this means we
bring into the mathematical model the desire of each individual to
maximize his gain in bargaining. We shall briefly review this theory in
the terminology used in this paper.

                    UTILITY THEORY OF THE INDIVIDUAL


  The concept of an "anticipation" is important in this theory. This
concept will be explained partly by illustration. Suppose Mr. Smith
knows he will be given a new Buick tomorrow. We may say that he has
a Buick anticipation. Similarly, he might have a Cadillac anticipation.
If he knew that tomorrow a coin would be tossed to decide whether he
would get a Buick or a Cadillac, we should say that he had a 2 Buick,
2 Cadillac anticipation. Thus an anticipation of an individual is a st
of expectation which may involve the certainty of some contingencies
and various probabilities of other contingencies. As another example,
Mr. Smith might know that he will get a Buick tomorrow and think
that he has half a chance of getting a Cadillac too. The 2 Buick, - Cadillac
anticipation mentioned above illustrates the following important prop-
erty of anticipations: if 0 < p < 1 and A and B represent two anticipa-
tions, there is an anticipation, which we represent by pA + (1 - p) B,
which is a probability combination of the two anticipations where there
is a probability p of A and 1 - p of B.
  By making the following assumptions we are enabled to develop the
utility theory of a single individual:
  1. An individual offered two possible anticipations can decide which
is preferable or that they are equally desirable.
  2. The ordering thus produced is transitive; if A is better than B
and B is better than C then A is better than C.
  3. Any probability combination of equally desirable states is just as
desirable as either.
  4. If A, B, and C are as in assumption (2), then there is a proba-
bility combination of A and C which is just as desirable as C. This
amounts to an assumption of continuity.
  5. If 0 < p < 1 and A and B are equally desirable, then pA +
(1 - p) C and pB + (1 - p) C are equally desirable. Also, if A and B
are equally desirable, A may be substituted for B in any desirability
ordering relationship satisfied by B.



     This content downloaded from 165.82.98.155 on Tue, 25 Sep 2018 16:50:16 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                           THE BARGAINING PROBLEM 157



  These assumptions suffice to show the existence of a satisfactory
utility function, assigning a real number to each anticipation of an
individual. This utility function is not unique, that is, if u is such a func-
tion then so also is au + b, provided a > 0. Letting capital letters repre-
sent anticipations and small ones real numbers, such a utility function will
satisfy the following properties:
  (a) u(A) > u(B) is equivalent to A is more desirable than B, etc.
  (b) IfO ?< p <, 1 then u[pA + (1 - p) B] = pu(A) + (1 - p) u(B).
This is the important linearity property of a utility function.

                              TWO PERSON THEORY

  In Theory of Games and Economic Behavior a theory of n-person
games is developed which includes as a special case the two-person bar-
gaining problem. But the theory there developed makes no attempt to
find a value for a given n-person game, that is, to determine what it is
worth to each player to have the opportunity to engage in the game.
This determination is accomplished only in the case of the two-person
zero sum game.
  It is our viewpoint that these n-person games should have values;
that is, there should be a set of numbers which depend continuously
upon the set of quantities comprising the mathematical description of
the game and which express the utility to each player of the oppor-
tunity to engage in the game.
  We may define a two-person anticipation as a combination of two one-
person anticipations. Thus we have two individuals, each with a certain
expectation of his future environment. We may regard the one-person
utility functions as applicable to the two-person anticipations, each
giving the result it would give if applied to the corresponding one-person
anticipation which is a component of the two-person anticipation. A
probability combination of two two-person anticipations is defined by
making the corresponding combinations for their components. Thus if
[A, B] is a two-person anticipation and 0 < p < 1, then

                            p[A, B] + (1 - p)[C, D]
will be defined as

                     [pA + (1 - p)C, pB + (1 - p)D].

Clearly the one-person utility functions will have the same linearity
property here as in the one-person case. From this point onwards when
the term anticipation is used it shall mean two-person anticipation.
  In a bargaining situation one anticipation is especially distinguished;
this is the anticipation of no cooperation between the bargainers. It is



      This content downloaded from 165.82.98.155 on Tue, 25 Sep 2018 16:50:16 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
158     JOHN           F.    NASH,           JR.



natural, therefore, to use utility functions for the two individuals which
assign the number zero to this anticipation. This still leaves each indi-
vidual's utility function determined only up to multiplication by a
positive real number. Henceforth any utility functions used shall be
understood to be so chosen.
  We may produce a graphical representation of the situation facing
the two by choosing utility functions for them and plotting the utilities
of all available anticipations in a plane graph.
  It is necessary to introduce assumptions about the nature of the set
of points thus obtained. We wish to assume that this set of points is
compact and convex, in the mathematical senses. It should be convex
since an anticipation which will graph into any point on a straight line
segment between two points of the set can always be obtained by the ap-
propriate probability combination of two anticipations which graph into
the two points. The condition of compactness implies, for one thing,
that the set of points must be bounded, that is, that they can all be
inclosed in a sufficiently large square in the plane. It also implies that
any continuous function of the utilities assumes a maximum value for
the set at some point of the set.
  We shall regard two anticipations which have the same utility for any
utility function corresponding to either individual as equivalent so that
the graph becomes a complete representation of the essential features of
the situation. Of course, the graph is only determined up to changes of
scale since the utility functions are not completely determined.
  Now since our solution should consist of rational expectations of gain
by the two bargainers, these expectations should be realizable by an
appropriate agreement between the two. Hence, there should be an
available anticipation which gives each the amount of satisfaction he
should expect to get. It is reasonable to assume that the two, being
rational, would simply agree to that anticipation, or to an equivalent
one. Hence, we may think of one point in the set of the graph as repre-
senting the solution, and also representing all anticipations that the two
might agree upon as fair bargains. We shall develop the theory by giving
conditions which should hold for the relationship between this solution
point and the set, and from these deduce a simple condition determining
the solution point. We shall consider only those cases in which there is a
possibility that both individuals could gain from the situation. (This
does not exclude cases where, in the end, only one individual could have
benefited because the "fair bargain" might consist of an agreement to
use a probability method to decide who is to gain in the end.
Any probability combination of available anticipations is an available
anticipation.)




     This content downloaded from 165.82.98.155 on Tue, 25 Sep 2018 16:50:16 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                          THE BARGAINING PROBLEM 159



   Let u, and u2 be utility functions f
represent the solution point in a set S which is compact and convex
and includes the origin. We assume:
  6. If a is a point in S such that there exists another point : in S with
the property u1(f) > ul(a) and u2(f) > u2(a), then a 5 c(S).
  7. If the set T contains the set S and c(T) is in S, then c(T) = c(S).
  We say that a set S is symmetric if there exist utility operators u1
and u2 such that when (a, b) is contained in S, (b, a) is also contained
in S; that is, such that the graph becomes symmetrical with respect to
the line u1 = u2 .
  8. If S is symmetric and u1 and u2 display this, then c(S) is a point
of the form (a, a), that is, a point on the line u1 = u2 .
  The first assumption above expresses the idea that each individual
wishes to maximize the utility to himself of the ultimate bargain. The
third expresses equality of bargaining skill. The second is more compli-
cated. The following interpretation may help to show the naturalness of
this assumption: If two rational individuals would agree that c(T) would
be a fair bargain if T were the set of possible bargains, then they should
be willing to make an agreement, of lesser restrictiveness, not to attempt
to arrive at any bargains represented by points outside of the set S if S
contained c(T). If S were contained in T this would reduce their situa-
tion to one with S as the set of possibilities. Hence c(S) should
equal c(T).
  We now show that these conditions require that the solution be the
point of the set in the first quadrant where ul u2 is maximized. We know
some such point exists from the compactness. Convexity makes it unique.
   Let us now choose the utility functions so that the above-mentioned
point is transformed into the point (1, 1). Since this involves the multi-
plication of the utilities by constants, (1, 1) will now be the point of
maximum ul u2. For no points of the set will ul + u2 > 2, now, since
if there were a point of the set with ul + u2> 2 at some point on the line
segment between (1, 1) and that point, there would be a value of ul u2
greater than one (see Figure 1).
  We may now construct a square in the region u, + u2 ( 2 which is
symmetrical in the line ul = u2, which has one side on the line ul + u2
= 2, and which completely encloses the set of alternatives. Considering
the square region formed as the set of alternatives, instead of the older
set, it is clear that (1, 1) is the only point satisfying assumptions (6)
and (8). Now using assumption (7) we may conclude that (1, 1) must
also be the solution point when our original (transformed) set is the set
of alternatives. This establishes the assertion.
   We shall now give a few examples of the application of this theory.




     This content downloaded from 165.82.98.155 on Tue, 25 Sep 2018 16:50:16 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
160     JOHN           F.    NASH,             JR.



                                    EXAMPLES


  Let us suppose that two intelligent individuals, Bill and Jack, are in
a position where they may barter goods but have no money with which



                                     U2 AXIS




                     S TZ /zZ A ~~~~~~~~~~~~U, ax IS




                                 \ / ~~~~AT P, U + U2 > 2

                                      a0, ~~AT 0 U U2>1 I


                                     FIGURE 1



to facilitate exchange. Further, let us assume for simplicity that t
utility to either individual of a portion of the total number of goo
vrolved is the sum of the utilities to him of the individual goods in that
portion. We give below a table of goods possessed by each individual
with the utility of each to each individual. The utility functions used
for the two individuals are, of course, to be regarded as arbitrary.

    This content downloaded from 165.82.98.155 on Tue, 25 Sep 2018 16:50:16 UTC
                     All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                              THE BARGA1NING PROBLEM 161


                  Bill's             Utility               Utility
                  goods to Bill to Jack
                      book 2                                   4
                      whip  2                                  2
                      ball 2                                   1
                      bat  2                                   2
                      box  4                                   1
                Jack's
                goods
                      pen                             10        1
                       toy                                4    1
                      knife                                6    2
                       hat                                2    2

  The graph for this bargaining situation is included as an illustration
(Figure 2). It turns out to be a convex polygon in which the point where
the product of the utility gains is maximized is at a vertex and where
there is but one corresponding anticipation. This is:

                 Bill gives Jack: book, whip, ball, and bat,
                Jack gives Bill: pen, toy, and knife.

 When the bargainers have a common medium of exchange the problem
may take on an especially simple form. In many cases the money equiva-

                  JACK'S
               UTILITY GAIN




                                     15   .   .   _~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~OL   TO


                                  SOLUTION POINT/


                   LT         0   RNAT            |   /   CORRESPONDING            \




          UT     IIT          Y   6GAI|N              20<   23\




                FIGURE                        2       FIGURE        3
  FIGURE 2-The solution point is on a rectangular hyperbola lying in the first
quadrant and touching the set of alternatives at but one point.
  FIGURE 3-The inner area represents the bargains possible without the use of
money. The area between parallel lines represents the possibilities allowing the
use of money. Utility and gain measured by money are here equated for small
amounts of money. The solution must be formed using a barter-type bargain
for which ul + u2 is at a maximum and using also an exchange of money.


     This content downloaded from 165.82.98.155 on Tue, 25 Sep 2018 16:50:16 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
162     JOHN             F.   NASH,          JR.



lent of a good will serve as a satisfactory approximate utility function.
(By the money equivalent is meant the amount of money which is just
as desirable as the good to the individual with whom we are concerned.)
This occurs when the utility of an amount of money is approximately a
linear function of the amount in the range of amounts concerned in the
situation. When we may use a common medium of exchange for the
utility function for each individual the set of points in the graph is such
that that portion of it in the first quadrant forms an isosceles right tri-
angle. Hence the solution has each bargainer getting the same money
profit (see Figure 3).

  Princeton University




     This content downloaded from 165.82.98.155 on Tue, 25 Sep 2018 16:50:16 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
