                     Econometrica, Vol. 68, No. 5 ŽSeptember, 2000., 1127᎐1150


             A SIMPLE ADAPTIVE PROCEDURE LEADING TO
                     CORRELATED EQUILIBRIUM 1

                    BY SERGIU HART AND ANDREU MAS-COLELL2

         We propose a new and simple adaptive procedure for playing a game: ‘‘regret-match-
     ing.’’ In this procedure, players may depart from their current play with probabilities that
     are proportional to measures of regret for not having used other strategies in the past. It
     is shown that our adaptive procedure guarantees that, with probability one, the empirical
     distributions of play converge to the set of correlated equilibria of the game.

        KEYWORDS: Adaptive procedure, correlated equilibrium, no regret, regret-matching,
     simple strategies.


                                       1. INTRODUCTION
THE LEADING NONCOOPERATIVE EQUILIBRIUM NOTIONS for N-person games in
strategic Žnormal. form are Nash equilibrium Žand its refinements. and corre-
lated equilibrium. In this paper we focus on the concept of correlated equilib-
rium.
   A correlated equilibriumᎏa notion introduced by Aumann Ž1974. ᎏcan be
described as follows: Assume that, before the game is played, each player
receives a private signal Žwhich does not affect the payoffs.. The player may then
choose his action in the game depending on this signal. A correlated equilibrium
of the original game is just a Nash equilibrium of the game with the signals.
Considering all possible signal structures generates all correlated equilibria. If
the signals are Žstochastically . independent across the players, it is a Nash
equilibrium Žin mixed or pure strategies . of the original game. But the signals
could well be correlated, in which case new equilibria may obtain.
   Equivalently, a correlated equilibrium is a probability distribution on N-tuples
of actions, which can be interpreted as the distribution of play instructions given
to the players by some ‘‘device’’ or ‘‘referee.’’ Each player is givenᎏprivatelyᎏ
instructions for his own play only; the joint distribution is known to all of them.
Also, for every possible instruction that a player receives, the player realizes that
the instruction provides a best response to the random estimated play of the
other playersᎏassuming they all follow their instructions.
   There is much to be said for correlated equilibrium. See Aumann Ž1974, 1987.
for an analysis and foundational arguments in terms of rationality. Also, from a
   1
     October 1998 Žminor corrections: June 1999.. Previous versions: February 1998; November 1997;
December 1996; March 1996 Žhandout.. Research partially supported by grants of the U.S.-Israel
Binational Science Foundation, the Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities, the Spanish
Ministry of Education, and the Generalitat de Catalunya.
   2
     We want to acknowledge the useful comments and suggestions of Robert Aumann, Antonio
Cabrales, Dean Foster, David Levine, Alvin Roth, Reinhard Selten, Sylvain Sorin, an editor, the
anonymous referees, and the participants at various seminars where this work was presented.

                                                1127
1128                 SERGIU HART AND ANDREU MAS-COLELL


practical point of view, it could be argued that correlated equilibrium may be
the most relevant noncooperative solution concept. Indeed, with the possible
exception of well-controlled environments, it is hard to exclude a priori the
possibility that correlating signals are amply available to the players, and thus
find their way into the equilibrium.
   This paper is concerned with dynamic considerations. We pose the following
question: Are there simple adapti¨ e procedures always leading to correlated equilib-
rium?
   Foster and Vohra Ž1997. have obtained a procedure converging to the set of
correlated equilibria. The work of Fudenberg and Levine Ž1999. led to a second
one. We introduce here a procedure that we view as particularly simple and
intuitive Žsee Section 4 for a comparative discussion of all these procedures.. It
does not entail any sophisticated updating, prediction, or fully rational behavior.
Our procedure takes place in discrete time and it specifies that players adjust
strategies probabilistically. This adjustment is guided by ‘‘regret measures’’
based on observation of past periods. Players know the past history of play of all
players, as well as their own payoff matrix Žbut not necessarily the payoff
matrices of the other players.. Our Main Theorem is: The adaptive procedure
generates trajectories of play that almost surely converge to the set of correlated
equilibria.
   The procedure is as follows: At each period, a player may either continue
playing the same strategy as in the previous period, or switch to other strategies,
with probabilities that are proportional to how much higher his accumulated
payoff would have been had he always made that change in the past. More
precisely, let U be his total payoff up to now; for each strategy k different from
his last period strategy j, let V Ž k . be the total payoff he would have received if
he had played k every time in the past that he chose j Žand everything else
remained unchanged.. Then only those strategies k with V Ž k . larger than U
may be switched to, with probabilities that are proportional to the differences
V Ž k . y U, which we call the ‘‘regret’’ for having played j rather than k. These
probabilities are normalized by a fixed factor, so that they add up to strictly less
than 1; with the remaining probability, the same strategy j is chosen as in the
last period.
   It is worthwhile to point out three properties of our procedure. First, its
simplicity; indeed, it is very easy to explain and to implement. It is not more
involved than fictitious play ŽBrown Ž1951. and Robinson Ž1951.; note that in the
two-person zero-sum case, our procedure also yields the minimax value.. Sec-
ond, the procedure is not of the ‘‘best-reply’’ variety Žsuch as fictitious play,
smooth fictitious play ŽFudenberg and Levine Ž1995, 1999.. or calibrated learn-
ing ŽFoster and Vohra Ž1997..; see Section 4 for further details.. Players do not
choose only their ‘‘best’’ actions, nor do they give probability close to 1 to these
choices. Instead, all ‘‘better’’ actions may be chosen, with probabilities that are
proportional to the apparent gains, as measured by the regrets; the procedure
could thus be called ‘‘regret-matching.’’ And third, there is ‘‘inertia.’’ The strategy
played in the last period matters: There is always a positive probability of
                                      CORRELATED EQUILIBRIUM                                       1129

continuing to play this strategy and, moreover, changes from it occur only if
there is reason to do so.
   At this point a question may arise: Can one actually guarantee that the
smaller set of Nash equilibria is always reached? The answer is definitely ‘‘no.’’
On the one hand, in our procedure, as in most others, there is a natural
coordination device: the common history, observed by all players. It is thus
reasonable to expect that, at the end, independence among the players will not
obtain. On the other hand, the set of Nash equilibria is a mathematically
complex set Ža set of fixed-points; by comparison, the set of correlated equilibria
is a convex polytope., and simple adaptive procedures cannot be expected to
guarantee the global convergence to such a set.
   After this introductory section, in Section 2 we present the model, describe
the adaptive procedure, and state our result Žthe Main Theorem.. Section 3 is
devoted to a ‘‘stylized variation’’ of the procedure of Section 2. It is a variation
that lends itself to a very direct proof, based on Blackwell’s Ž1956a. Approacha-
bility Theorem. This is a new instrument in this field, which may well turn out to
be widely applicable.
   Section 4 contains a discussion of the literature, together with a number of
relevant issues. The proof of the Main Theorem is relegated to the Appendix.

                                 2. THE MODEL AND MAIN RESULT
    Let ⌫ s Ž N, Ž S i . i g N , Ž u i . i g N . be a finite N-person game in strategic Žnormal.
form: N is the set of players, S i is the set of strategies of player i, and
u i : Ł i g N S i ª ⺢ is player i’s payoff function. All sets N and S i are assumed to
be finite. Denote by S [ Ł i g N S i the set of N-tuples of strategies; the generic
element of S is s s Ž s i . i g N , X and syi denotes the strategy combination of all
players except i, i.e., syi s Ž s i . iX / i . We focus attention on the following solution
concept:

   DEFINITION: A probability distribution ␺ on S is a correlated equilibrium of ⌫
if, for every i g N, every j g S i and every k g S i we have 3

                  Ý        ␺ Ž s .w u i Ž k, syi . y u i Ž s .x F 0.
              sgS : s sj
                      i



If in the above inequality we replace the right-hand side by an ␧ ) 0, then we
obtain the concept of a correlated ␧-equilibrium.
   Note that every Nash equilibrium is a correlated equilibrium. Indeed, Nash
equilibria correspond to the special case where ␺ is a product measure, that is,
the play of the different players is independent. Also, the set of correlated
equilibria is nonempty, closed and convex, and even in simple games Že.g.,
‘‘chicken’’. it may include distributions that are not in the convex hull of the
Nash equilibrium distributions.
  3
      We write Ý s g S : s isj for the sum over all N-tuples s in S whose ith coordinate s i equals j.
1130                       SERGIU HART AND ANDREU MAS-COLELL


   Suppose now that the game ⌫ is played repeatedly through time: t s 1, 2, . . . .
At time t q 1, given a history of play h t s Ž s␶ .␶ts1 g Ł ␶t s1 S, we postulate that
each player i g N chooses stq1  i
                                   g S i according to a probability distribution 4
        Ž   i.
ptq1 g ⌬ S which is defined in the following way:
 i

   For every two different strategies j, k g S i of player i, suppose i were to
replace strategy j, every time that it was played in the past, by strategy k; his
payoff at time ␶ , for ␶ F t, would become

Ž 2.1a.      W␶ i Ž j, k . [
                               ½   u i Ž k, s␶yi . ,
                                   u i Ž s␶ . ,
                                                                 if s␶i s j,
                                                                 otherwise.

The resulting difference in i’s average payoff up to time t is then
                               1       t                         1    t
Ž 2.1b.      Dti Ž j, k . [
                               t
                                 Ý W␶ i Ž j, k . y t Ý u i Ž s␶ .
                                   ␶s1                               ␶s1

                              1
                         s
                              t ␶Ft : s isj
                                           Ý           u i Ž k, s␶yi . y u i Ž s␶ . .
                                               ␶


Finally, denote
                                                   q
Ž 2.1c.      R ti Ž j, k . [ Dti Ž j, k .               s max  Dti Ž j, k . , 0 4 .

The expression R it Ž j, k . has a clear interpretation as a measure of the Žaverage.
‘‘regret’’ at period t for not having played, every time that j was played in the
past, the different strategy k.
   Fix ␮ ) 0 to be a large enough number.5 Let j g S i be the strategy last
chosen by player i, i.e., j s sti. Then the probability distribution ptq1 i
                                                                             g ⌬Ž S i .
used by i at time t q 1 is defined as

             ¡p Ž k . [ 1 R Ž j, k . ,
                 i                         i
                                                                               for all k / j,
            ~                      ␮
                 tq1                       t
Ž 2.2.
             ¢p Ž j . [ 1 y
                 i
                 tq1                               Ý        i
                                                           ptq1 Žk..
                                           kgS i : k/j

                                                   i Ž .
Note that the choice of ␮ guarantees that ptq1        j ) 0; that is, there is always a
positive probability of playing the same strategy as in the previous period. The
play p1i g ⌬Ž S i . at the initial period is chosen arbitrarily. 6
   4
        We write ⌬Ž Q . for the set of probability distributions over a finite set Q.
   5
        The parameter ␮ is fixed throughout the procedure Žindependent of time and history.. It suffices
to take ␮ so that ␮ ) 2 M i Ž m i y 1. for all i g N, where M i is an upper bound for < u i Ž⭈.< and m i is
the number of strategies of player i. Even better, we could let ␮ satisfy ␮ ) Ž m i y 1.< u i Ž k, syi . y
u i Ž j, syi .< for all j, k g S i, all syi g Syi , and all i g N Žand moreover we could use a different ␮ i for
each player i ..
     6
        Actually, the procedure could start with any finite number of periods where the play is arbitrary.
                                   CORRELATED EQUILIBRIUM                               1131

   Informally, Ž2.2. may be described as follows. Player i starts from a ‘‘reference
point’’: his current actual play. His choice next period is governed by propensi-
ties to depart from it. It is natural therefore to postulate that, if a change occurs,
it should be to actions that are perceived as being better, relative to the current
choice. In addition, and in the spirit of adaptive behavior, we assume that all
such better choices get positive probabilities; also, the better an alternative
action seems, the higher the probability of choosing it next time. Further, there
is also inertia: the probability of staying put Žand playing the same action as in
the last period. is always positive.
   More precisely, the probabilities of switching to different strategies are
proportional to their regrets relative to the current strategy. The factor of
proportionality is constant. In particular, if the regrets are small, then the
probability of switching from current play is also small.
   For every t, let z t g ⌬Ž S . be the empirical distribution of the N-tuples of
strategies played up to time t. That is, for every 7 s g S,
                      1
Ž 2.3.     z t Ž s . [  ␶ F t : s␶ s s 4
                      t
is the relative frequency that the N-tuple s has been played in the first t
periods. We can now state our main result.

   MAIN THEOREM: If e¨ ery player plays according to the adapti¨ e procedure Ž2.2.,
then the empirical distributions of play z t con¨ erge almost surely as t ª ⬁ to the set
of correlated equilibrium distributions of the game ⌫ .

   Note that convergence to the set of correlated equilibria does not imply that
the sequence z t converges to a point. The Main Theorem asserts that the
following statement holds with probability one: For any ␧ ) 0 there is T0 s T0 Ž ␧ .
such that for all t ) T0 we can find a correlated equilibrium distribution ␺ t at a
distance less than ␧ from z t . ŽNote that this T0 depends on the history; it is an
‘‘a.s. finite stopping time.’’. That is, the Main Theorem says that, with probability
one, for any ␧ ) 0, the Žrandom. trajectory Ž z1 , z 2 , . . . , z t , . . . . enters and then
stays forever in the ␧-neighborhood in ⌬Ž S . of the set of correlated equilibria.
Put differently: Given any ␧ ) 0, there exists a constant Ži.e., independent of
history. t 0 s t 0 Ž ␧ . such that, with probability at least 1 y ␧ , the empirical
distributions z t for all t ) t 0 are in the ␧-neighborhood of the set of correlated
equilibria. Finally, let us note that because the set of correlated equilibria is
nonempty and compact, the statement ‘‘the trajectory Ž z t . converges to the set
of correlated equilibria’’ is equivalent to the statement ‘‘the trajectory Ž z t . is
such that for any ␧ ) 0 there is T1 s T1Ž ␧ . with the property that z t is a
correlated ␧-equilibrium for all t ) T1.’’
   We conclude this section with a few comments Žsee also Section 4.:
   Ž1. Our adaptive procedure Ž2.2. requires player i to know his own payoff
matrix Žbut not those of the other players. and, at time t q 1, the history h t ;
  7
      We write < Q < for the number of elements of a finite set Q.
1132                   SERGIU HART AND ANDREU MAS-COLELL


actually, the empirical distribution z t of Ž s1 , s2 , . . . , st . suffices. In terms of
computation, player i needs to keep record of the time t together with the
m i Ž m i y 1. numbers Dti Ž j, k . for all j / k in S i Žand update these numbers every
period..
   Ž2. At every period the adaptive procedure that we propose randomizes only
over the strategies that exhibit positive regret relative to the most recently
played strategy. Some strategies may, therefore, receive zero probability. Sup-
pose that we were to allow for trembles. Specifically, suppose that at every
period we put a ␦ ) 0 probability on the uniform tremble Žeach strategy thus
being played with probability at least ␦rm i .. It can be shown that in this case
the empirical distributions z t converge to the set of correlated ␧-equilibria Žof
course, ␧ depends on ␦ , and it goes to zero as ␦ goes to zero.. In conclusion,
unlike most adaptive procedures, ours does not rely on trembles Žwhich are
usually needed, technically, to get the ‘‘ergodicity’’ properties.; moreover, our
result is robust with respect to trembles.
   Ž3. Our adaptive procedure depends only on one parameter,8 ␮. This may be
viewed as an ‘‘inertia’’ parameter Žsee Subsections 4Žg. and 4Žh..: A higher ␮
yields lower probabilities of switching. The convergence to the set of correlated
equilibria is always guaranteed Žfor any large enough ␮ ; see footnote 5., but the
speed of convergence changes with ␮.
   Ž4. We know little about additional convergence properties for z t . It is easy to
see that the empirical distributions z t either converge to a Nash equilibrium in
pure strategies, or must be infinitely often outside the set of correlated equilib-
ria Žbecause, if z t is a correlated equilibrium from some time on, then9 all
regrets are 0, and the play does not change.. This implies, in particular, that
interior Žrelative to ⌬Ž S .. points of the set of correlated equilibria that are not
pure Nash equilibria are unreachable as the limit of some z t Žbut it is possible
that they are reachable as limits of a subsequence of z t ..
   Ž5. There are other procedures enjoying convergence properties similar to
ours: the procedures of Foster and Vohra Ž1997., of Fudenberg and Levine
Ž1999., and of Theorem A in Section 3 below; see the discussion in Section 4.
The delimitation of general classes of procedures converging to correlated
equilibria seems, therefore, an interesting research problem.10


                 3. NO REGRET AND BLACKWELL APPROACHABILITY
  In this section Žwhich can be viewed as a motivational preliminary. we shall
replace the adaptive procedure of Section 2 by another procedure that, while
related to it, is more stylized. Then we shall analyze it by means of Blackwell’s
Ž1956a. Approachability Theorem, and prove that it yields convergence to the
  8
    Using a parameter ␮ Žrather than a fixed normalization of the payoffs. was suggested to us by
Reinhard Selten.
  9
    See the Proposition in Section 3.
  10
     See Hart and Mas-Colell Ž1999. and Cahn Ž2000. for such results.
                                       CORRELATED EQUILIBRIUM                                      1133

set of correlated equilibria. In fact, the Main Theorem stated in Section 2, and
its proof in Appendix 1, were inspired by consideration and careful study of the
result of this section. Furthermore, the procedure here is interesting in its own
right Žsee, for instance, the Remark following the statement of Theorem A, and
Žd. in Section 4..
   Fix a player i and recall the procedure of Section 2: At time t q 1 the
transition probabilities, from the strategy played by player i in period t to the
strategies to be played at t q 1, are determined by the stochastic matrix defined
by the system Ž2.2.. Consider now an invariant probability vector qti s Ž qti Ž j .. j g S i
g ⌬Ž S i . for this matrix Žsuch a vector always exists.. That is, qti satisfies
                                       1                                     1
             qti Ž j . s Ý qti Ž k .       R it Ž k, j . q qti Ž j . 1 y Ý       R it Ž j, k . ,
                          k/j          ␮                                 k/j ␮

for every j g S . By collecting terms, multiplying by ␮ , and formally letting
                      i

R it Ž j, j . [ 0, the above expression can be rewritten as
Ž 3.1.         Ý qti Ž k . R it Ž k, j . s qti Ž j . Ý R ti Ž j, k . ,
              kgS i                                 kgS i

for every j g S i.
  In this section we shall assume that play at time t q 1 by player i is
determined by a solution qti to the system of equations Ž3.1.; i.e., ptq1
                                                                      i Ž .
                                                                          j [ qti Ž j ..
In a sense, we assume that player i at time t q 1 goes instantly to the invariant
distribution of the stochastic transition matrix determined by Ž2.2.. We now state
the key result.

     THEOREM A: Suppose that at e¨ ery period t q 1 player i chooses strategies
according to a probability ¨ ector qti that satisfies Ž3.1.. Then player i’s regrets
R it Ž j, k . con¨ erge to zero almost surely for e¨ ery j, k in S i with j / k.

   REMARK: Note thatᎏin contrast to the Main Theorem, where every player
uses Ž2.2. ᎏno assumption is made in Theorem A on how players different from
i choose their strategies Žexcept for the fact that for every t, given the history up
to t, play is independent among players.. In the terminology of Fudenberg and
Levine Ž1999, 1998., the adaptive procedure of this section is ‘‘Žuniversally.
calibrated.’’ For an extended discussion of this issue, see Subsection 4Žd..
   What is the connection between regrets and correlated equilibria? It turns out
that a necessary and sufficient condition for the empirical distributions to
converge to the set of correlated equilibria is precisely that all regrets converge
to zero. More generally, we have the following proposition.

   PROPOSITION: Let Ž st . ts1, 2, . . . be a sequence of plays Ž i.e., st g S for all t . and
let 11 ␧ G 0. Then: limsup t ª⬁ R ti Ž j, k . F ␧ for e¨ ery i g N and e¨ ery j, k g S i with
  11
       Note that both ␧ ) 0 and ␧ s 0 are included.
1134                       SERGIU HART AND ANDREU MAS-COLELL


j / k, if and only if the sequence of empirical distributions z t Ž defined by Ž2.3..
con¨ erges to the set of correlated ␧-equilibria.

   PROOF: For each player i and every j / k in S i we have
                              1
             Dti Ž j, k . s          Ý
                               t ␶Ft : s isj
                                                  u i Ž k, s␶yi . y u i Ž j, s␶yi .
                                          ␶

                         s        Ý           z t Ž s .w u i Ž k, syi . y u i Ž j, syi .x .
                              sgS : s sj
                                      i



On any subsequence where z t converges, say z tX ª ␺ g ⌬Ž S ., we get
             DtiX Ž j, k . ª       Ý           ␺ Ž s .w u i Ž k, syi . y u i Ž j, syi .x .
                               sgS : s isj

The result is immediate from the definition of a correlated ␧-equilibrium and
Ž2.1c..                                                                Q. E. D.

   Theorem A and the Proposition immediately imply the following corollary.

   COROLLARY: Suppose that at each period t q 1 e¨ ery player i chooses strategies
according to a probability ¨ ector qti that satisfies Ž3.1.. Then the empirical distribu-
tions of play z t con¨ erge almost surely as t ª ⬁ to the set of correlated equilibria of
the game ⌫ .

   Before addressing the formal proof of Theorem A, we shall present and
discuss Blackwell’s Approachability Theorem.
   The basic setup contemplates a decision-maker i with a Žfinite. action set S i.
For a finite indexing set L, the decision-maker receives an < L <-dimensional
vector payoff ¨ Ž s i, syi . g ⺢ L that depends on his action s i g S i and on some
external action syi belonging to a Žfinite. set Syi Žwe will refer to yi as the
‘‘opponent’’.. The decision problem is repeated through time. Let st s Ž sti , syi
                                                                                 t
                                                                                   .
         yi
g S = S denote the choices at time t; of course, both i and yi may use
    i

randomizations. The question is whether the decision-maker i can guaran-
tee that the time average of the vector payoffs, Dt [ Ž1rt .Ý␶ F t¨ Ž s␶ . '
Ž1rt .Ý␶ F t¨ Ž s␶i , s␶yi ., approaches a predetermined set Žin ⺢ L ..
   Let C be a convex and closed subset of ⺢ L. The set C is approachable by the
decision-maker i if there is a procedure12 for i that guarantees that the average
vector payoff Dt approaches the set C Ži.e.,13 distŽ Dt , C . ª 0 almost surely as
t ª ⬁., regardless of the choices of the opponent yi. To state Blackwell’s result,
   12
        In the repeated setup, we refer to a Žbehavior. strategy as a ‘‘procedure.’’
   13
       distŽ x, A. [ min5 x y a 5 : ag A4, where 5 ⭈ 5 is the Euclidean norm. Strictly speaking, Blackwell’s
definition of approachability requires also that the convergence of the distance to 0 be uniform over
the procedures of the opponent; i.e., there is a procedure of i such that for every ␧ ) 0 there is
t 0 ' t 0 Ž ␧ . such that for any procedure of yi we have P wdistŽ Dt , C . - ␧ for all t ) t 0 x ) 1 y ␧ . The
Blackwell procedure Ždefined in the next Theorem. guarantees this as well.
                                        CORRELATED EQUILIBRIUM                                                   1135

let w C denote the support function of the convex set C , i.e., w C Ž ␭. [ sup ␭ ⭈ c :
c g C 4 for all ␭ in ⺢ L . Given a point xg ⺢ L which is not in C , let F Ž x . be
the Žunique. point in C that is closest to x in the Euclidean distance, and
put ␭Ž x . [ xy F Ž x .; note that ␭Ž x . is an outward normal to the set C at the
point F Ž x ..

   BLACKWELL’S APPROACHABILITY THEOREM: Let C ; ⺢ L be a con¨ ex and
closed set, with support function w C . Then C is approachable by i if and only if for
e¨ ery ␭ g ⺢ L there exists a mixed strategy q␭ g ⌬Ž S i . such that 14

Ž 3.2.        ␭ ⭈ ¨ Ž q␭ , syi . F w C Ž ␭ . ,         for all syi g Syi .

Moreo¨ er, the following procedure of i guarantees that distŽ Dt , C . con¨ erges almost
surely to 0 as t ª ⬁: At time t q 1, play q␭Ž D t . if Dt f C , and play arbitrarily
if Dt g C .

   We will refer to the condition for approachability given in the Theorem as the
Blackwell condition, and to the procedure there as the Blackwell procedure. To
get some intuition for the result, assume that Dt is not in C , and let H Ž Dt . be
the half-space of ⺢ L that contains C Žand not Dt . and is bounded by the
supporting hyperplane to C at F Ž Dt . with normal ␭Ž Dt .; see Figure 1. When i
uses the Blackwell procedure, it guarantees that ¨ Ž q␭Ž D t . , syi . lies in H Ž Dt . for
all syi in Syi Žby Ž3.2... Therefore, given Dt , the expectation of the next period




                                      FIGURE 1.ᎏApproaching the set C .

       ¨ Ž q, syi . denotes the expected payoff, i.e., Ý s i g S i q Ž s i . ¨ Ž s i , syi .. Of course, only ␭ / 0 with
   14

w C Ž ␭. - ⬁ need to be considered in Ž3.2..
1136                          SERGIU HART AND ANDREU MAS-COLELL


payoff Ew ¨ Ž stq1 . ¬ Dt x will lie in the half-space H Ž Dt . for any pure choice syi
                                                                                     tq1 of
yi at time t q 1, and thus also for any randomized choice of yi. The expected
average vector payoff at period t q 1 Žconditional on Dt . is
                                        t              1
             E w Dtq1 ¬ Dt x s                 Dt q         E w ¨ Ž stq1 . ¬ Dt x .
                                     tq1              tq1
When t is large, Ew Dtq1 ¬ Dt x will thus be inside the circle of center F Ž Dt . and
radius 5 ␭Ž Dt .5. Hence
             dist Ž E w Dtq1 ¬ Dt x , C . F E w Dtq1 ¬ Dt x y F Ž Dt . - ␭Ž Dt .
                                               s dist Ž Dt , C .
Žthe first inequality follows from the fact that F Ž Dt . is in C .. A precise
computation shows that the distance not only decreases, but actually goes to
zero.15 For proofs of Blackwell’s Approachability Theory, see16 Blackwell Ž1956a.,
or Mertens, Sorin, and Zamir Ž1995, Theorem 4.3..
   We now prove Theorem A.

  PROOF OF THEOREM A: As mentioned, the proof of this Theorem consists of
an application of Blackwell’s Approachability Theorem. Let
             L [  Ž j, k . g S i = S i : j / k 4 ,
and define the vector payoff ¨ Ž s i, syi . g ⺢ L by letting its Ž j, k . g L coordin-
ate be
                                            iŽ

                                               ½ yi . Ž yi .
              w ¨ Ž s i , syi .xŽ j, k . [ u k, s y u j, s ,
                                           0,
                                                                                      if s i s j,
                                                                                      otherwise.
   Let C be the nonpositive orthant ⺢y L
                                         [  x g ⺢ L : x F 04 . We claim that C is
approachable by i. Indeed, the support function of C is given by w C Ž ␭. s 0 for
all ␭ g ⺢q
         L
            and w C Ž ␭. s ⬁ otherwise; so only ␭ g ⺢q  L
                                                          need to be considered.
Condition Ž3.2. is

                 Ý         ␭Ž j, k . Ý q␭ Ž s i .w ¨ Ž s i , syi .xŽ j, k . F 0,
              Ž j, k .gL             s igS i

or
Ž 3.3.           Ý         ␭Ž j, k . q␭ Ž j .w u i Ž k, syi . y u i Ž j, syi .x F 0
              Ž j, k .gL

     15
      Note that one looks here at expected average payoffs; the Strong Law of Large Numbers for
Dependent Random Variablesᎏsee the Proof of Step M10 in the Appendixᎏimplies that the
actual average payoffs also converge to the set C .
   16
      The Blackwell condition is usually stated as follows: For every x f C there exists q Ž x . g ⌬Ž S i .
such that w xy F Ž x .x ⭈ w ¨ Ž q Ž x ., syi . y F Ž x .x F 0, for all syi g Syi. It is easy to verify that this is
equivalent to our formulation. We further note a simple way of stating the Blackwell result: A
convex set C is approachable if and only if any half-space containing C is approachable.
                                  CORRELATED EQUILIBRIUM                                1137

for all syi g Syi. After collecting terms, the left-hand side of Ž3.3. can be written
as
Ž 3.4a.     Ý ␣ Ž j . u i Ž j, syi . ,
           jgS i

where
Ž 3.4b.    ␣ Ž j . [ Ý q␭ Ž k . ␭Ž k, j . y q␭ Ž j . Ý ␭Ž j, k . .
                      kgS i                        kgS i

Let q␭ g ⌬Ž S i . be an invariant vector for the nonnegative S i = S i matrix with
entries ␭Ž j, k . for j / k and 0 for j s k Žsuch a q␭ always exists.. That is, q␭
satisfies
Ž 3.5.      Ý q␭Ž k . ␭Ž k, j . s q␭ Ž j . Ý ␭Ž j, k . ,
           kgS i                           kgS i

for every j g S i. Therefore ␣ Ž j . s 0 for all j g S i, and so inequality Ž3.3. holds
true Žas an equality 17 . for all syi g Syi. The Blackwell condition is thus satisfied
by the set C s ⺢y             L
                                .
   Consider Dt , the average payoff vector at time t. Its Ž j, k .-coordinate is
Ž1rt .Ý␶ F t w ¨ Ž s␶ .xŽ j, k . s Dti Ž j, k .. If Dt f ⺢y
                                                          L
                                                            , then the closest point to Dt in
⺢y is F Ž Dt . s w Dt x Žsee Figure 2., hence ␭Ž Dt . s Dt y w Dt xys w Dt xqs
   L                              y

Ž R it Ž j, k ..Ž j, k .g L , which is the vector of regrets at time t. Now the given strategy




                                 FIGURE 2.ᎏApproaching C s ⺢y
                                                            L
                                                              .
   17
      Note that this is precisely Formula Ž2. in the Proof of Theorem 1 in Hart and Schmeidler
Ž1989.; see Subsection 4Ži..
1138                     SERGIU HART AND ANDREU MAS-COLELL


of i at time t q 1 satisfies Ž3.1., which is exactly condition Ž3.5. for ␭ s ␭Ž Dt ..
Hence player i uses the Blackwell procedure for ⺢y     L
                                                         , which guarantees that the
average vector payoff Dt approaches ⺢y, or R t j, k . ª 0 a.s. for every j / k.
                                           L        iŽ

                                                                             Q. E. D.

   REMARK: The proof of Blackwell’s Approachability Theorem also provides
bounds on the speed of convergence. In our case, one gets the following: The
expectation Ew R it Ž j, k .x of the regrets is of the order of 1r 't , and the probabil-
ity that z t is a correlated ␧-equilibrium for all t ) T is at least 1 y ceyc T Žfor an
appropriate constant c ) 0 depending on ␧ ; see Foster and Vohra Ž1999,
Section 4.1... Clearly, a better speed of convergence18 for the expected regrets
cannot be guaranteed, since, for instance, if the other players play stationary
mixed strategies, then the errors are of the order 1r 't by the Central Limit
Theorem.


                                          4. DISCUSSION
   This section discusses a number of important issues, including links and
comparisons to the relevant literature.
   Ža. Foster and Vohra. The seminal paper in this field of research is Foster and
Vohra Ž1997.. They consider, first, ‘‘forecasting rules’’ᎏon the play of
othersᎏthat enjoy good properties, namely, ‘‘calibration.’’ Second, they assume
that each player best-replies to such calibrated forecasts. The resulting proce-
dure leads to correlated equilibria. The motivation and the formulation are
quite different from ours; nonetheless, their results are close to our results
Žspecifically, to our Theorem A., since their calibrated forecasts are also based
on regret measures.19
   Žb. Fudenberg and Le¨ ine. The next important paper is Fudenberg and Levine
Ž1999. Žsee also their book Ž1998... In that paper they offer a class of adaptive
procedures, called ‘‘calibrated smooth fictitious play,’’ with the property that for
every ␧ ) 0 there are procedures in the class that guarantee almost sure
convergence to the set of correlated ␧-equilibria Žbut the conclusion does not
hold for ␧ s 0.. The formal structure of these procedures is also similar to that
of our Theorem A, in the sense that the mixed choice of a given player at time t
is determined as an invariant probability vector of a transition matrix. However,
the transition matrix Žand therefore the stochastic dynamics. is different from
the regret-based transition matrix of our Theorem A. To understand further the
similarities and differences between the Fudenberg and Levine procedures and
our own, the next two Subsections, Žc. and Žd., contain a detour on the concepts
of ‘‘universal consistency’’ and ‘‘universal calibration.’’
  18
     Up to a constant factor.
  19
     These regrets are defined on an ␧-grid on ⌬Ž Syi ., with ␧ going to zero as t goes to infinity.
Therefore, at each step in their procedure one needs to compute the invariant vector for a matrix of
an increasingly large size; by comparison, in our Theorem A the size of the matrix is fixed, m i = m i.
                                               CORRELATED EQUILIBRIUM                       1139

  Žc. Uni¨ ersal Consistency. The term ‘‘universal consistency’’ is due to Fuden-
berg and Levine Ž1995.. The concept goes back to Hannan Ž1957., who proved
the following result: There is a procedure Žin the setup of Section 2. for player i
that guarantees, no matter what the other players do, that

                                         1     t                      1    t
Ž 4.1.        limsup max
                                         t
                                           Ý u i Ž k , s␶yi . y t Ý u i Ž s␶ . F 0   a.s.
                tª⬁      kgS i               ␶s1                          ␶s1

In other words, i’s average payoff is, in the limit, no worse than if he were to
play any constant strategy k g S i for all ␶ F t. This property of the Hannan
procedure for player i is called uni¨ ersal consistency by Fudenberg and Levine
Ž1995. Žit is ‘‘universal’’ since it holds no matter how the other players play..
Another universally consistent procedure was shown by Blackwell Ž1956b. to
result from his Approachability Theorem Žsee also Luce and Raiffa Ž1957, pp.
482᎐483...
   The adaptive procedure of our Theorem A is also universally consistent.
Indeed, for each j in S i, Ž4.1. is guaranteed even when restricted to those
periods when player i chose that particular j; this being true for all j in S i, the
result follows. However, the application of Blackwell’s Approachability Theorem
in Section 3 suggests the following particularly simple procedure.
   At time t, for each strategy k in S i, let

                            1        t
Ž 4.2a.       Dti Ž k . [
                            t
                              Ý u i Ž k, s␶yi . y u i Ž s␶ . ,
                                ␶s1
                                                          q
                                             Dti Ž k .
Ž 4.2b.        i
              ptq1 Žk. [                                        q ,
                                 Ý
                                 X
                                                   Dti Ž kX .
                                k gS i

if the denominator is positive, and let ptq1 i
                                               g ⌬Ž S i . be arbitrary otherwise. The
strategy of player i is then, at time t q 1, to choose k in S i with probability
  i Ž .
ptq1    k . These probabilities are thus proportional to the ‘‘unconditional regrets’’
w Dti Ž k .xq Žby comparison to the ‘‘conditional on j’’ regrets of Section 2.. We
then have the following theorem.

  THEOREM B: The adapti¨ e procedure Ž4.2. is uni¨ ersally consistent for player i.

   The proof of Theorem B is similar to the proof of Theorem A in Section 3
and is omitted.
   Fudenberg and Levine Ž1995. propose a class of procedures that turn out to
be universally ␧-consistent: 20 ‘‘smooth fictitious play.’’ Player i follows a smooth
fictitious play behavior rule if at time t he plays a mixed strategy ␴ i g ⌬Ž S i . that
maximizes the sum of his expected payoff Žwith the actions of the remaining
  20
       That is, the right-hand side of Ž4.1. is ␧ ) 0 instead of 0.
1140                      SERGIU HART AND ANDREU MAS-COLELL


players distributed as in the empirical distribution up to t . and ␭¨ i Ž ␴ i ., where
␭ ) 0 and ¨ i is a strictly concave smooth function defined on i’s strategy
simplex, ⌬Ž S i ., with infinite length gradient at the boundary of ⌬Ž S i .. The result
of Fudenberg and Levine is then that, given any ␧ ) 0, there is a sufficiently
small ␭ such that universal ␧-consistency obtains for player i. Observe that, for
small ␭, smooth fictitious play is very close to fictitious play Žit amounts to
playing the best response with high probability and the remaining strategies with
low but positive probability.. The procedure is, therefore, clearly distinct from
Ž4.2.: In Ž4.2. all the better, even if not best, replies are played with significant
probability; also, in Ž4.2. the inferior replies get zero probability. Finally, it is
worth emphasizing that the tremble from best response is required for the
Fudenberg and Levine result, since fictitious play is not guaranteed to be
consistent. In contrast, the procedure of Ž4.2. has no trembles.
   The reader is referred to Hart and Mas-Colell Ž1999., where a wide class of
universally consistent procedures is exhibited and characterized Žincluding as
special cases Ž4.2. as well as smooth fictitious play..
   Žd. Uni¨ ersal Calibration. The idea of ‘‘universal calibration,’’ also introduced 21
by Fudenberg and Levine Ž1998, 1999., is that, again, regret measures go to zero
irrespective of the other players’ play. The difference is that, now, the set of
regret measures is richer: It consists of regrets that are conditional on the
strategy currently played by i himself. Recall the Proposition of Section 3: If
such universally calibrated strategies are played by all players, then all regrets
become nonpositive in the limit, and thus the convergence to the correlated
equilibrium set is guaranteed.
   The procedure of Theorem A is universally calibrated; so Žup to ␧ . is the
‘‘calibrated smooth fictitious play’’ of Fudenberg and Levine Ž1999.. The two
procedures stand to each other as, in the unconditional version, Theorem B
stands to ‘‘smooth fictitious play.’’
   The procedure Ž2.2. of our Main Theorem is not universally calibrated. If only
player i follows the procedure, we cannot conclude that all his regrets go to
zero; adversaries who know the procedure used by player i could keep his
regrets positive.22 Such sophisticated strategies of the other players, however,
are outside the framework of our studyᎏwhich deals with simple adaptive
behavior. In fact, it turns out that the procedure of our Main Theorem is
guaranteed to be calibrated not just against opponents using the same proce-
dure, but also against a wide class of behaviors.23
   We regard the simplicity of Ž2.2. as a salient point. Of course, if one needs to
guarantee calibration even against sophisticated adversaries, one may have to
give up on simplicity and resort to the procedure of Theorem A instead.

   21
      They actually call it ‘‘calibration’’; we prefer the term ‘‘universal calibration,’’ since it refers to
any behavior of the opponents Žas in their ‘‘wconditionalx universal consistency’’..
   22
      At each time t q 1, let them play an Ž N y 1.-tuple of strategies that minimizes the expected
Žrelative to ptq
              i   .                                                                   Ž
                 1 payoff of player i; for an example, see Fudenberg and Levine 1998, Section 8.10 .
                                                                                                            .
   23
      Namely, such that the dependence of any one choice of yi on any one past choice of i is small,
relative to the number of periods; see Cahn Ž2000..
                                   CORRELATED EQUILIBRIUM                                           1141

   Že. Better-reply ¨ s. Best-reply. Note that all the procedures in the literature
reviewed above are best-reply-based: A player uses Žalmost. exclusively actions
that are Žalmost. best-replies to a certain belief about his opponents. In contrast,
our procedure gives significant probabilities to any actions that are just better
Žrather than best.. This has the additional effect of making the behavior
continuous, without need for approximations.
   Žf. Eigen¨ ector Procedures. The procedure of our Main Theorem differs from
all the other procedures leading to correlated equilibria Žincluding that of our
Theorem A. in an important aspect: It does not require the player to compute,
at every step, an invariant Žeigen-. vector for an appropriate positive matrix.
Again, the simplicity 24 of Ž2.2. is an essential property when discussing nonso-
phisticated behavior; this is the reason we have sought this result as our Main
Theorem.
   Žg. Inertia. A specific and most distinctive feature by which the procedure of
our Main Theorem differs from those of Theorem A and the other works
mentioned above is that in the former the individual decisions privilege the most
recent action taken: The probabilities used at period t q 1 are best thought of as
propensities to depart from the play at t.
   Viewed in this light, our procedure has significant inertial characteristics. In
particular, there is a positive probability of moving from the strategy played at t
only if there is another that appears better Žin which case the probabilities of
playing the better strategies are proportional to the regrets relative to the period
t strategy..25
   Žh. Friction. The procedure Ž2.2. exhibits ‘‘friction’’: There is always a positive
probability of continuing with the period t strategy.26 To understand the role
played by friction,27 suppose that we were to modify the procedure Ž2.2. by
requiring that the switching probabilities be rescaled in such a way that a switch
occurs if and only if there is at least one better strategy Ži.e., one with positive
regret.. Then the result of the Main Theorem may not hold. For example, in the
familiar two-person 2 = 2 coordination game, if we start with an uncoordinated
strategy pair, then the play alternates between the two uncoordinated pairs.
However, no distribution concentrated on these two pairs is a correlated
equilibrium.
   It is worth emphasizing that in our result the breaking away from a bad cycle,
like the one just described, is obtained not by ergodic arguments but by the
probability of staying put Ži.e., by friction.. What matters is that the diagonal of
   24
      For a good test of the simplicity of a procedure, try to explain it verbally; in particular, consider
the procedure of our Main Theorem vs. those requiring the computation of eigenvectors.
   25
      It is worth pointing out that if a player’s last choice was j, then the relative probabilities of
                       X
switching to k or to k do not depend only on the average utilities that would have been obtained if
                                    X
j had been changed to k or to k in the past, but also on the average utility that was obtained in
                                                                                                          X
those periods by playing j itself Žit is the magnitude of the increases in moving from j to k or to k
             .
that matters .
   26
      See Sanchirico Ž1996. and Section 4.6 in Fudenberg and Levine Ž1998. for a related point in a
best-reply context.
   27
      See Step M7 in the Proof of the Main Theorem in the Appendix.
1142                     SERGIU HART AND ANDREU MAS-COLELL


the transition matrix be positive, rather than that all the entries be positive
Žwhich, indeed, will not hold in our case..
   Ži. The set of correlated equilibria. The set of correlated equilibria of a game is,
in contrast to the set of Nash equilibria, geometrically simple: It is a convex set
Žactually, a convex polytope. of distributions. Since it includes the Nash equilib-
ria we know it is nonempty. Hart and Schmeidler Ž1989. Žsee also Nau and
McCardle Ž1990.. provide an elementary Žnonfixed point. proof of the nonempti-
ness of the set of correlated equilibria. This is done by using the Minimax
Theorem. Specifically, Hart and Schmeidler proceed by associating to the given
N-person game an auxiliary two-person zero-sum game. As it turns out, the
correlated equilibria of the original game correspond to the maximin strategies
of player I in the auxiliary game. More precisely, in the Hart᎐Schmeidler
auxiliary game, player I chooses a distribution over N-tuples of actions, and
player II chooses a pair of strategies for one of the N original players
Žinterpreted as a play and a suggested deviation from it.. The payoff to auxiliary
player II is the expected gain of the designated original player if he were to
follow the change suggested by auxiliary player II. In other words, it is the
‘‘regret’’ of that original player for not deviating. The starting point for our
research was the observation that fictitious play applied to the Hart᎐Schmeidler
auxiliary game must converge, by the result of Robinson Ž1951., and thus yield
optimal strategies in the auxiliary game, in particular for player Iᎏhence,
correlated equilibria in the original game. A direct application of this idea does
not, however, produce anything that is simple and separable across the N
players Ži.e., such that the choice of each player at time t is made independently
of the other players’ choices at tᎏan indispensable requirement..28 Yet,
our adaptive procedure is based on ‘‘no-regret’’ ideas motivated by this analysis
and it is the direct descendantᎏseveral modifications laterᎏof this line of
research. 29
   Žj. The case of the unknown game. The adaptive procedure of Section 2 can be
modified30 to yield convergence to correlated equilibria also in the case where
players neither know the game, nor observe the choices of the other players.31
Specifically, in choosing play probabilities at time t q 1, a player uses informa-
tion only on his own actual past play and payoffs Žand not on the payoffs that
would have been obtained if his past play had been different.. The construction

   28
      This needed ‘‘decoupling’’ across the N original players explains why applying linear program-
ming-type methods to reach the convex polytope of correlated equilibria is not a fruitful approach.
The resulting procedures operate in the space of N-tuples of strategies S Žmore precisely, in ⌬Ž S ..,
whereas adaptive procedures should be defined for each player i separately Ži.e., on ⌬Ž S i ...
   29
      For another interesting use of the auxiliary two-person zero-sum game, see Myerson Ž1997..
   30
      Following a suggestion of Dean Foster.
   31
                                        ˜ Ž1968., Megiddo Ž1980., Foster and Vohra Ž1993., Auer
      For similar constructions, see: Banos
et al. Ž1995., Roth and Erev Ž1995., Erev and Roth Ž1998., Camerer and Ho Ž1998., Marimon Ž1996,
Section 3.4., and Fudenberg and Levine Ž1998, Section 4.8.. One may view this type of result in
terms of ‘‘stimulus-response’’ decision behavior models.
                                               CORRELATED EQUILIBRIUM                                               1143

is based on replacing Dti Ž j, k . Žsee Ž2.1b.. by
                                    1                       p␶i Ž j .
              Cti Ž j, k . [
                                     t
                                                Ý     pi Ž k .
                                                                        u i Ž s␶ . y      Ý          u i Ž s␶ . .
                                          ␶Ft : s isk ␶
                                                    ␶                                  ␶Ft : s␶isj

Thus, the payoff that player i would have received had he played k rather than
j is estimated by the actual payoffs he obtained when he did play k in the past.
   For precise formulations, results and proofs, as well as further discussions,
the reader is referred to Hart and Mas-Colell Ž2000..

  Center for Rationality and Interacti¨ e Decision Theory, Dept. of Economics, and
Dept. of Mathematics, The Hebrew Uni¨ ersity of Jerusalem, Feldman Bldg., Gi¨ at-
Ram, 91904 Jerusalem, Israel; hart@math.huji.ac.il; http:rrwww.ma.huji.ac.ilr
; hart
                                         and
  Dept. de Economia i Empresa, and CREI, Uni¨ ersitat Pompeu Fabra, Ramon
Trias Fargas 25᎐27, 08005 Barcelona, Spain; mcolell@upf.es; http:rrwww.econ.
upf.esrcreirmcolell.htm

                    Manuscript recei¨ ed No¨ ember, 1997; final re¨ ision recei¨ ed July, 1999.


                                    APPENDIX : PROOF OF THE MAIN THEOREM
   This appendix is devoted to the proof of the Main Theorem, stated in Section 2. The proof is
inspired by the result of Section 3 ŽTheorem A.. It is however more complex on account of our
transition probabilities not being the invariant measures that, as we saw in Section 3, fitted so well
with Blackwell’s Approachability Theorem.
   As in the standard proof of Blackwell’s Approachability Theorem, the proof of our Main
Theorem is based on a recursive formula for the distance of the vector of regrets to the negative
orthant. However, our procedure Ž2.2. does not satisfy the Blackwell condition; it is rather a sort of
iterative approximation to it. Thus, a simple one-period recursion Žfrom t to t q 1. does not suffice,
and we have to consider instead a multi-period recursion where a large ‘‘block’’ of periods, from t to
t q ¨ , is combined together. Both t and ¨ are carefully chosen; in particular, t and ¨ go to infinity,
but ¨ is relatively small compared to t.
   We start by introducing some notation. Fix player i in N. For simplicity, we drop reference to the
index i whenever this cannot cause confusion Žthus we write Dt and R t instead of Dti and R ti , and
so on.. Let m [ < S i < be the number of strategies of player i, and let M be an upper bound on i’s
possible payoffs: MG < u i Ž s .< for all s in S. Denote L [ Ž j, k . g S i = S i : j / k 4; then ⺢ L is the
mŽ m y 1.-dimensional Euclidean space with coordinates indexed by L. For each t s 1, 2, . . . and
each Ž j, k . in L, put 32

              A t Ž j, k . s 1 s tisj4 w u i Ž k , syi
                                                     t
                                                        . y u i Ž st .x ,
                               1
              Dt Ž j, k . s        Ý A␶ Ž j, k . ,
                               t ␶s1
                                                                 q
              R t Ž j, k . s Dq
                              t
                                Ž j, k . ' w Dt Ž j, k .x .

We shall write A t for the vector Ž A t Ž j, k .. j/ k g ⺢ L ; the same goes for Dt , Dq
                                                                                       t , R t , and so on. Let

   32
        We write 1 G for the indicator of the event G.
1144                              SERGIU HART AND ANDREU MAS-COLELL

⌸ t Ž⭈, ⭈ . denote the transition probabilities from t to t q 1 Žthese are computed after period t, based
on h t .:

                                  ¡   1
                                          R t Ž j, k . ,                                if k / j,
                 ⌸ Ž j, k . [~
                                     ␮

                                  ¢ Ý␮
                   t                                       1                X
                                    1y                         R t Ž j, k . ,           if k s j.
                                               X
                                              k /j

Thus, at time t q 1 the strategy used by player i is to choose each k g S i with probability
 i Ž .       Ž i .                                                   Ž .
    1 k s ⌸ t s t , k . Note that the choice of ␮ guarantees that ⌸ t j, j ) 0 for all j g S and all t.
                                                                                            i
ptq
Finally, let
                                                   2
                 ␳ t [ w dist Ž Dt , ⺢y
                                      L .x


be the squared distance Žin ⺢ L . of the vector Dt to the nonpositive orthant ⺢y                L
                                                                                                  . Since the closest
point to Dt in ⺢y       L
                           is 33 Dy                5      y5 2
                                  t , we have ␳ t s Dt y Dt    s 5 Dqt
                                                                       5 2 s Ý j/ k w Dq
                                                                                       t
                                                                                         Ž j, k .x 2 .
      It will be convenient to use the standard ‘‘O’’ notation: For two real-valued functions f Ž⭈. and
g Ž⭈. defined on a domain X, ‘‘ f Ž x . s O Ž g Ž x ..’’ means that there exists a constant K- ⬁ such that
< f Ž x .< F Kg Ž x . for all x in 34 X. We write P for Probability, and E for Expectation. From now on, t,
¨ , and w will denote positive integers; h t s Ž s␶ .␶ F t will be histories of length t; j, k, and s i will be
elements of S i ; s and syi will be elements of S and Syi , respectively. Unless stated otherwise, all
statements should be understood to hold ‘‘for all t, ¨ , h t , j, k, etc.’’; where histories h t are
concerned, only those that occur with positive probability are considered.
      We divide the proof of the Main Theorem into 11 steps, M1᎐M11, which we now state formally;
an intuitive guide follows.
      䢇 Step M1:

                                                                            ¨
Ži.              E wŽ t q ¨ . ␳ tq ¨ ¬ h t x F t 2␳ t q 2 t
                              2
                                                                         Ý R t ⭈ E w A tqw ¬ h t x q O Ž ¨ 2 . ; and
                                                                        ws1

Ž ii .           Ž t q ¨ . ␳ tq ¨ y t ␳ t s O Ž t¨ q ¨
                          2               2                             2.
                                                                                .
Define
                 ␣ t , w Ž j, syi . [ Ý ⌸ t Ž k , j . P w stqw s Ž k , syi . ¬ h t x y P w stqw s Ž j, syi . ¬ h t x .
                                      kgS i
      䢇    Step M 2:
                 R t ⭈ E w A tqw ¬ h t x s ␮
                                                       yi
                                                           Ý Ý ␣ t , w Ž j, syi . u i Ž j, syi . .
                                                       s    gS y i jgS i

      䢇    Step M 3:

                                                                 ž /
                                                                   ¨
                 R tq ¨ Ž j, k . y R t Ž j, k . s O                         .
                                                                    t
For each t ) 0 and each history h t , define an auxiliary stochastic process Ž ˆstqw . ws0, 1, 2, . . . with values
in S as follows: The initial value is ˆst s st , and the transition probabilities are 35

                                                                         Ł ⌸ t i Ž ˆstqwy1
                                                                                    X   X           X
                 Pwˆ
                   stq w s s ¬ ˆ            stqwy1 x [
                               st , . . . , ˆ                                        i
                                                                                           , si . .
                                                                        X
                                                                        i gN


       We write w x xy for min x, 04, and Dy
      33
                                            t for the vector
                                                             Žw Dt Ž j, k .xy. Ž j, k .g L .
      34
       The domain X will usually be the set of positive integers, or the set of vectors whose
coordinates are positive integers. Thus when we write, say, f Ž t, ¨ . s O Ž ¨ ., it means < f Ž t, ¨ .< F K¨ for
all ¨ and t. The constants K will always depend only on the game Žthrough N, m, M, and so on. and
on the parameter X␮.
                                                                           X
    35
       We write ⌸ t i for the transition probability matrix of player i Žthus ⌸ t is ⌸ t i ..
                                            CORRELATED EQUILIBRIUM                                                     1145
ŽThe ˆs-process is thus stationary: It uses the transition probabilities of period t at each period t q w,
for all w G 0..
   䢇 Step M4:




              P w stq w s s ¬ h t x y P w ˆ
                                          stqw s s ¬ h t x s O
                                                                   ž / w2
                                                                       t
                                                                            .


Define

              ˆt , w Ž j, syi . [ Ý ⌸ t Ž k , j . P w ˆstqw s Ž k , syi . ¬ h t x y P w ˆstqw s Ž j, syi . ¬ h t x .
              ␣
                                   kgS i

   䢇   Step M5:


              ␣ t , w Ž j, syi . y ␣
                                   ˆt , w Ž j, syi . s O   ž /
                                                             w2
                                                              t
                                                                   .

   䢇   Step M6:

              ˆt , w Ž j, syi . s P w ˆsyi
              ␣                         tqw s s
                                               yi
                                                  ¬ h t xw ⌸ t wq 1 y ⌸ t w xŽ sti , j . ,

where ⌸ t w ' Ž ⌸ t . w is the wth power of the matrix ⌸ t , and w ⌸ t wq 1 y ⌸ t w xŽ sti , j . denotes the Ž sti , j .
element of the matrix ⌸ t wq 1 y ⌸ t w.
   䢇 Step M 7:




              ˆt , w Ž j, sy1 . s O Ž wy1 r2 . .
              ␣

   䢇   Step M 8:

              E wŽ t q ¨ . ␳ tq ¨ ¬ h t x F t 2␳ t q O Ž ¨ 3 q t¨ 1r2 . .
                          2



For each n s 1, 2, . . . , let t n [ ? n5r 3 @ be the largest integer not exceeding n5r 3 .
  䢇 Step M 9:




              E w t nq
                    2                    x               Ž 2.
                       1 ␳ t nq 1 ¬ h t n F t n ␳ t n q O n .
                                              2


   䢇   Step M10:

               lim ␳ t n s 0 a.s.
              nª⬁

   䢇   Step M11:

               lim R t Ž j, k . s 0 a.s.
              tª⬁

    We now provide an intuitive guide to the proof. The first step ŽM1Ži.. is our basic recursion
 equation. In Blackwell’s Theorem, the middle term on the right-hand side vanishes Žit is F 0 by
 Ž3.2... This is not so in our case; Steps M2᎐M8 are thus devoted to estimating this term. Step M2
 yields an expression similar to Ž3.4., but here the coefficients ␣ depend also on the moves of the
 other players. Indeed, given h t , the choices stqw   i
                                                           and syi                                      Ž
                                                                 tqw are not independent when w ) 1 since
 the transition probabilities change with time.. Therefore we replace the process Ž stq w . 0 F w F ¨ by
 another process Ž ˆ stq w . 0 F w F ¨ , with a stationary transition matrix Žthat of period t .. For w small
 relative to t, the change in probabilities is small Žsee Steps M3 and M4., and we estimate the total
 difference ŽStep M5.. Next ŽStep M6., we factor out the moves of the other players Žwhich, in the
ˆs-process, are independent of the moves of player i . from the coefficients ␣ˆ. At this point we get the
1146                                 SERGIU HART AND ANDREU MAS-COLELL

difference between the transition probabilities after w periods and after w q 1 periods Žfor
comparison, in formula Ž3.4. we would replace both by the invariant distribution, so the difference
vanishes.. This difference is shown ŽStep M7. to be small, since w is large and the transition matrix
has all its diagonal elements strictly positive.36 Substituting in M1Ži. yields the final recursive
formula ŽStep M8.. The proof is now completed ŽSteps M9᎐M11. by considering a carefully chosen
subsequence of periods Ž t n . ns1, 2, . . . .
   The rest of this Appendix contains the proofs of the Steps M1᎐M11.

   䢇    PROOF OF STEP M1: Because Dy
                                   t g ⺢y we have
                                        L


                                                                                               ¨                  2
                                                                  t               1
               ␳ tq ¨ F 5 Dtq ¨ y Dy
                                   t
                                     52s
                                                              t q¨
                                                                      Dt q
                                                                                 t q¨
                                                                                      Ý A tqw y Dyt
                                                                                              ws1
                                 2                                                        ¨
                             t                                             2t
                     s
                         Ž t q¨ .2
                                          5 D t y Dy
                                                   t
                                                     52q
                                                                      Ž t q ¨ . 2 ws1
                                                                                      Ý Ž A tqw y Dyt . ⭈ Ž Dt y Dyt .
                                                          ¨                           2
                                     ¨2         1
                         q
                             Ž t q¨ .      2
                                                ¨
                                                  Ý A tq w y Dyt
                                                     ws1
                                                                       ¨
                             t   2
                                                          2t                                           ¨2
                     F
                         Ž t q¨ .     2
                                          ␳t q
                                                    Ž t q¨ .
                                                             Ý A tqw ⭈ R t q Ž t q ¨ . 2 mŽ m y 1. 16 M 2 .
                                                                  2
                                                                      ws1

Indeed: < u i Ž s .< F M, so < A tq w Ž j, k .< F 2 M and < Dt Ž j, k .< F 2 M, yielding the upper bound on the third
term. As for the second term, note that R t s Dq                            y         y    q
                                                            t s Dt y Dt and Dt ⭈ Dt s 0. This gives the bound
of ii . To get i , take conditional expectation given the history h t so ␳ t and R t are known.. Q. E. D.
   Ž .             Ž .                                                             Ž

   䢇    PROOF OF STEP M2: We have

               E w A tq w Ž j, k . ¬ h t x s        Ý ␾ Ž j, syi .w u i Ž k , syi . y u i Ž j, syi .x ,
                                                    syi

where ␾ Ž j, syi . [ P w stq w s Ž j, syi . ¬ h t x. So

               R t ⭈ E w A tqw ¬ h t x s       Ý Ý R t Ž j, k . Ý ␾ Ž j, syi .w u i Ž k , syi . y u i Ž j, syi .x
                                                j     k/j                   syi


                                          s    Ý Ý u i Ž j, syi . Ý R t Ž k, j . ␾ Ž k , syi . y Ý R t Ž j, k . ␾ Ž j, syi .
                                               syi        j                      k/j                                  k/j

Žwe have collected together all terms containing u j, s                            iŽ          yi ..
                                                                                                    . Now, R t Ž k, j . s ␮⌸ t Ž k, j . for k / j, and
Ý k / j R t Ž j, k . s ␮ Ž1 y ⌸ t Ž j, j .. by definition, so

               R t ⭈ E w A tqw ¬ h t x s ␮       Ý Ý u i Ž j, syi . Ý ⌸ t Ž k , j . ␾ Ž k , syi . y ␾ Ž j, syi .
                                                    syi       j                       k

Žnote that the last sum is now over all k in S i ..                                                                                          Q. E. D.

   䢇    PROOF OF STEP M3: This follows immediately from
                                                                             ¨
               Ž t q ¨ .w Dtq ¨ Ž j, k . y Dt Ž j, k .x s                   Ý A tqw Ž j, k . y ¨ Dt Ž j, k . ,
                                                                           ws1

together with < A tq w Ž j, k .< F 2 M and < Dt Ž j, k .< F 2 M.                                                                             Q. E. D.
   36
        For further discussion on this point, see the Proof of Step M7.
                                            CORRELATED EQUILIBRIUM                                                           1147

   䢇 PROOF OF STEP M4: We need the following Lemma, which gives bounds for the changes in the

w-step transition probabilities as a function of changes in the 1-step transitions.

    LEMMA: Let Ž X n . n G 0 and Ž Yn . n G 0 be two stochastic processes with ¨ alues in a finite set B. Assume
X 0 s Y0 and

                P w X n s bn ¬ X 0 s b 0 , . . . , X ny1 s bny1 x y P w Yn s bn ¬ Y0 s b 0 , . . . , Yny1 s bny1 x F ␤n

for all n G 1 and all b 0 , . . . , bny1 , bn g B. Then

                P w X nq w s bnqw ¬ X 0 s b 0 , . . . , X ny1 s bny1 x
                                                                                              w
                      yP w Ynq w s bnqw ¬ Y0 s b 0 , . . . , Yny1 s bny1 x F < B <            Ý ␤nqr
                                                                                              rs0

for all n G 1, w G 0, and all b 0 , . . . , bny1 , bnqw g B.

   PROOF: We write PX and PY for the probabilities of the two processes Ž X n . n and Ž Yn . n ,
respectively Žthus PX w bnqw ¬ b 0 , . . . , bny1 x stands for P w X nqw s bnqw ¬ X 0 s b 0 , . . . , X ny1 s bny1 x, and
so on.. The proof is by induction on w.
              PX w bnqw ¬ b 0 , . . . , bny1 x

                      s   Ý PX w bnqw ¬ b0 , . . . , bn x PX w bn ¬ b0 , . . . , bny1 x
                          bn
                                                                                                  w
                      F   Ý PY w bnqw ¬ b0 , . . . , bn x PX w bn ¬ b0 , . . . , bny1 x q < B < Ý ␤nqr
                          bn                                                                   rs1
                                                                                                       w
                      F   Ý PY w bnqw ¬ b0 , . . . , bn xŽ PY w bn ¬ b0 , . . . , bny1 x q ␤n . q < B < Ý ␤nqr
                          bn                                                                           rs1
                                                                               w
                      F PY w bnqw ¬ b 0 , . . . , bny1 x q < B < ␤n q < B <   Ý ␤nqr
                                                                              rs1

Žthe first inequality is by the induction hypothesis.. Exchanging the roles of X and Y completes
the proof.                                                                               Q. E. D.

   We proceed now with the proof of Step M4. From t to t q w there are < N < w transitions Žat each
period, think of the players moving one after the other, in some arbitrary order.. Step M3 im-
plies that each transition probability for the ˆ   s-process differs from the corresponding one for
the s-process by at most O Ž wrt ., which yields, by the Lemma, a total difference of < N < w < S < O Ž wrt .
s O Ž w 2rt ..                                                                                      Q. E. D.

   䢇   PROOF OF STEP M5: Immediate by Step M4.                                                                              Q. E. D.
                                                                                          X
   䢇  PROOF OF STEP M6: Given h t , the random variables Ž ˆ      i
                                                                 stqw  . w are independent over the
                   X
different players i in N; indeed, the transition probabilities are all determined at time t, and the
players randomize independently. Hence:

                stq w s Ž j, syi . ¬ h t x s P w ˆ
              Pwˆ                                syi
                                                  tqw s s
                                                         yi
                                                            ¬ ht x P w ˆi
                                                                       stqw s j ¬ ht x ,

implying that

              ˆt , w Ž j, syi . s P w ˆsyi
              ␣                         tqw s s
                                               yi
                                                  ¬ ht x     Ý ⌸ t Ž k , j . P w ˆstqw
                                                                                   i
                                                                                       s k ¬ ht x y P w ˆi
                                                                                                        stqw s j ¬ ht x .
                                                            kgS i
1148                          SERGIU HART AND ANDREU MAS-COLELL

Now P w ˆ   i
          stq              x
               w s j ¬ h t is the probability of reaching j in w steps starting from s t , using the transition
                                                                                            i

probability matrix ⌸ t . Therefore P ˆ     w stqw s j ¬ h t is the st , j -element of the wth power ⌸ t w ' Ž ⌸ t . w
                                              i            x      Ž i .

of ⌸ t , i.e., w ⌸ t w xŽ sti , j .. Hence

              ˆt , w Ž j, syi . s P w ˆsyi
              ␣                         tqw s s
                                               yi
                                                  ¬ ht x      Ý ⌸ t Ž k , j .w ⌸ t w xŽ sti , k . y w ⌸ t w xŽ sti , j .
                                                             kgS i

                              s P w syi
                                     tq w s s
                                     ˆ       yi
                                                ¬ h t xww ⌸ t wq 1 xŽ sti , j . y w ⌸ t w xŽ sti , j .x ,
completing the proof.                                                                                                          Q. E. D.

   䢇 PROOF OF STEP M7: It follows from M6 using the following Lemma Žrecall that ⌸ Ž j, j . ) 0 for
                                                                                  t
all j g S i ..

   LEMMA: Let ⌸ be an m = m stochastic matrix with all of its diagonal entries positi¨ e. Then
w ⌸ wq 1 y ⌸ w xŽ j, k . s O Ž wy1 r2 . for all j, k s 1, . . . , m.

   PROOF: 37 Let ␤ ) 0 be a lower bound on all the diagonal entries of ⌸ , i.e., ␤ [ min j ⌸ Ž j, j .. We
can then write ⌸ s ␤ I q Ž1 y ␤ . ⌳, where ⌳ is also a stochastic matrix. Now

                             ž /
                        w
              ⌸ w s Ý wr ␤ wyr Ž 1 y ␤ . ⌳ r ,
                                        r

                       rs0

and similarly for ⌸ wq 1. Subtracting yields


                                             ž /
                                   wq1
              ⌸ wq 1 y ⌸ w s Ý ␥r wr ␤ wyr Ž 1 y ␤ . ⌳ r ,
                                                    r

                                    rs0

where ␥r [ ␤ Ž w q 1.rŽ w q 1 y r . y 1. Now ␥r ) 0 if r ) q [ Ž w q 1.Ž1 y ␤ ., and ␥r F 0 if r F q;
together with 0 F ⌳ r Ž j, k . F 1, we get

              Ý ␥r ž wr / ␤ wy r Ž1 y ␤ . F w ⌸ wq1 y ⌸ w xŽ j, k . F Ý ␥r ž wr / ␤ wyr Ž1 y ␤ . .
                                                r                                                                          r

              rFq                                                                       r)q

Consider the left-most sum. It equals

              Ý ž w qr 1 / ␤ wq 1yr Ž1 y ␤ . y Ý ž wr / ␤ wyr Ž1 y ␤ . s Gwq 1Ž q . y Gw Ž q . ,
                                                       r                                     r

              rFq                                           rFq

where GnŽ⭈. denotes the cumulative distribution function of a sum of n independent Bernoulli
random variables, each one having the value 0 with probability ␤ and the value 1 with probability
1 y ␤ . Using the normal approximation yields Ž⌽ denotes the standard normal cumulative distribu-
tion function.:

              Gwq 1Ž q . y Gw Ž q . s ⌽ Ž x . y ⌽ Ž y . q O
                                                                       ž'      1
                                                                            Ž w q 1.     / ž' /
                                                                                           qO
                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                      w
                                                                                                             ,

where
                    q y Ž w q 1 .Ž 1 y ␤ .                                 q y w Ž1 y ␤ .
              x[                                                     y[
                    'Ž w q 1. ␤ Ž1 y ␤ .               and
                                                                           'w␤ Ž1 y ␤ . ;
   37
      If ⌸ were a strictly positive matrix, then ⌸ wq 1 y ⌸ w ª 0 would be a standard result, because
then ⌸ w would converge to the invariant matrix. However, we know only that the diagonal
elements are positive. This implies that, if w is large, then with high probability there will be a
positive fraction of periods when the process does not move. But this number is random, so the
probabilities of going from j to k in w steps or in w q 1 steps should be almost the same Žsince it is
like having r ‘‘stay put’’ transitions versus r q 1..
                                            CORRELATED EQUILIBRIUM                                               1149
the two error terms O ŽŽ w q 1.y1 r2 . and O Ž wy1 r2 . are given by the Berry-Esseen    ´ Theorem Žsee
Feller Ž1965, Theorem XVI.5.1... By definition of q we have x s 0 and y s O Ž wy1 r2 .. The
derivative of ⌽ is bounded, so ⌽ Ž x . y ⌽ Ž y . s O Ž xy y . s O Ž wy1 r2 .. Altogether, the left-most sum
is O Ž wy1 r2 .. A similar computation applies to the right-most sum.                               Q. E. D.

   䢇 PROOF OF STEP M8: Steps M5 and M7 imply ␣ t, w Ž j, syi . s O Ž w 2rt q wy1r2 .. The formula of
Step M2 then yields

              R t ⭈ E w A tqw ¬ h t x s O
                                            ž   w2
                                                t            /
                                                     q wy1r2 .

Adding over w s 1, 2, . . . , ¨ Žnote that Ý ws 1w ␭ s O Ž ¨ ␭q1 . for ␭ / y1. and substituting into Step
                                                       ¨

M1Ži. gives the result.                                                                           Q. E. D.

   䢇   PROOF OF STEP M9: We use the inequality of Step M8 for t s t n and ¨ s t nq1 y t n . Because
¨ s ?Ž n q 1. 5r 3 @ y ? n5r 3 @ s O Ž n2r 3 ., we have ¨ 3 s O Ž n2 . and t¨ 1r 2 s O Ž n5r 3q1r3 . s O Ž n2 ., and the
result follows.                                                                                                Q. E. D.

   䢇   PROOF OF STEP M10: We use the following result Žsee Loeve
                                                             ` Ž1978, Theorem 32.1.E..:

   THEOREM ŽStrong Law of Large Numbers for Dependent Random Variables.: Let X n be a
sequence of random ¨ ariables and bn a sequence of real numbers increasing to ⬁, such that the series
Ý⬁ns 1 varŽ X n .rbn2 con¨ erges. Then
                    n
               1
                  Ý w X␯ y E w X␯ ¬ X1 , . . . , X␯y1 xx nª⬁ 0 a.s.
                                                                     6




               bn  ␯s1


    We take bn [ t n2 , and X n [ bn ␳ t n y bny1 ␳ t ny 1 s t n2 ␳ t n y t ny1
                                                                            2
                                                                                ␳ t ny 1 . By Step M1Žii. we have
< X n < F O Ž t n¨ n q ¨ n . s O Ž n ., thus Ý n varŽ x n .rbn s Ý n O Ž n
                         2          7r 3                     2            14r3 .rn20r3 s Ý n O Ž1rn2 . - ⬁. Next,
Step M9 implies

              Ž 1rbn .
                                                                 ž              /
                         Ý E w X␯ ¬ X1 , . . . , X␯y1 x F O ny1 0r3 Ý ␯ 2 s O Ž ny1 0r3 n3 . s O Ž ny1 r3 . ª 0.
                         ␯Fn                                             ␯ Fn

Applying the Theorem above thus yields that ␳ t n, which is nonnegative and equals Ž1rbn .Ý␯ F n X␯ ,
must converge to 0 a.s.                                                                     Q. E. D.

     䢇 PROOF OF STEP M11: Since            ␳ t n s Ý j/ k w R t nŽ j, k .x2 , the previous Step M10 implies that
R t nŽ j, k . ª 0 a.s. n ª ⬁, for all j / k. When t n F t F t nq1 , we have R t Ž j, k . y R t nŽ j, k . s O Ž ny1 . by
the inequality of Step M3, so R t Ž j, k . ª 0 a.s. t ª ⬁.                                                     Q. E. D.


                                                           REFERENCES
AUER, P., N. CESA-BIANCHI, Y. FREUND, AND R. E. SCHAPIRE Ž1995.: ‘‘Gambling in a Rigged Casino:
  The Adversarial Multi-Armed Bandit Problem,’’ in Proceedings of the 36 th Annual Symposium on
  Foundations of Computer Science, 322᎐331.
AUMANN, R. J. Ž1974.: ‘‘Subjectivity and Correlation in Randomized Strategies,’’ Journal of Mathe-
  matical Economics, 1, 67᎐96.
ᎏᎏᎏ Ž1987.: ‘‘Correlated Equilibrium as an Expression of Bayesian Rationality,’’ Econometrica,
  55, 1᎐18.
  ˜ , A. Ž1968.: ‘‘On Pseudo-Games,’’ The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 39, 1932᎐1945.
BANOS
BLACKWELL, D. Ž1956a.: ‘‘An Analog of the Minmax Theorem for Vector Payoffs,’’ Pacific Journal of
  Mathematics, 6, 1᎐8.
1150                    SERGIU HART AND ANDREU MAS-COLELL

ᎏᎏᎏ Ž1956b.: ‘‘Controlled Random Walks,’’ in Proceedings of the International Congress of
  Mathematicians 1954, Vol. III, ed. by E. P. Noordhoff. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 335᎐338.
BROWN, G. W. Ž1951.: ‘‘Iterative Solutions of Games by Fictitious Play,’’ in Acti¨ ity Analysis of
  Production and Allocation, Cowles Commission Monograph 13, ed. by T. C. Koopmans. New York:
  Wiley, pp. 374᎐376.
CAHN, A. Ž2000.: ‘‘General Procedures Leading to Correlated Equilibria,’’ The Hebrew University of
  Jerusalem, Center for Rationality DP-216.
CAMERER, C., AND T.-H. HO Ž1998.: ‘‘Experience-Weighted Attraction Learning in Coordination
  Games: Probability Rules, Heterogeneity, and Time-Variation,’’ Journal of Mathematical Psychol-
  ogy, 42, 305᎐326.
EREV, I., AND A. E. ROTH Ž1998.: ‘‘Predicting How People Play Games: Reinforcement Learning in
  Experimental Games with Unique, Mixed Strategy Equilibria,’’ American Economic Re¨ iew, 88,
  848᎐881.
FELLER, W. Ž1965.: An Introduction to Probability Theory and its Applications, Vol. II, 2nd edition.
  New York: Wiley.
FOSTER, D., AND R. V. VOHRA Ž1993.: ‘‘A Randomization Rule for Selecting Forecasts,’’ Operations
  Research, 41, 704᎐709.
ᎏᎏᎏ Ž1997.: ‘‘Calibrated Learning and Correlated Equilibrium,’’ Games and Economic Beha¨ ior,
  21, 40᎐55.
ᎏᎏᎏ Ž1998.: ‘‘Asymptotic Calibration,’’ Biometrika, 85, 379᎐390.
ᎏᎏᎏ Ž1999.: ‘‘Regret in the On-line Decision Problem,’’ Games and Economic Beha¨ ior, 29, 7᎐35.
FUDENBERG, D., AND D. K. LEVINE Ž1995.: ‘‘Universal Consistency and Cautious Fictitious Play,’’
  Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 19, 1065᎐1089.
ᎏᎏᎏ Ž1998.: Theory of Learning in Games. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
ᎏᎏᎏ Ž1999.: ‘‘Conditional Universal Consistency,’’ Games and Economic Beha¨ ior, 29, 104᎐130.
HANNAN, J. Ž1957.: ‘‘Approximation to Bayes Risk in Repeated Play,’’ in Contributions to the Theory
  of Games, Vol. III, Annals of Mathematics Studies 39, ed. by M. Dresher, A. W. Tucker, and P.
  Wolfe. Princeton: Princeton University Press, pp. 97᎐139.
HART, S., AND A. MAS-COLELL Ž1999.: ‘‘A General Class of Adaptive Strategies,’’ The Hebrew
  University of Jerusalem, Center for Rationality DP-192, forthcoming in Journal of Economic
  Theory.
ᎏᎏᎏ Ž2000.: ‘‘A Stimulus-Response Procedure Leading to Correlated Equilibrium,’’ The Hebrew
  University of Jerusalem, Center for Rationality Žmimeo..
HART, S., AND D. SCHMEIDLER Ž1989.: ‘‘Existence of Correlated Equilibria,’’ Mathematics of Opera-
  tions Research, 14, 18᎐25.
  ` , M. Ž1978.: Probability Theory, Vol. II, 4th edition. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
LOEVE
LUCE, R. D., AND H. RAIFFA Ž1957.: Games and Decisions. New York: Wiley.
MARIMON, R. Ž1996.: ‘‘Learning from Learning in Economics,’’ in Ad¨ ances in Economic Theory, ed.
  by D. Kreps. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
MEGIDDO, N. Ž1980.: ‘‘On Repeated Games with Incomplete Information Played by Non-Bayesian
  Players,’’ International Journal of Game Theory, 9, 157᎐167.
MERTENS, J.-F., S. SORIN, AND S. ZAMIR Ž1995.: ‘‘Repeated Games, Part A,’’ CORE DP-9420
  Žmimeo..
MYERSON, R. B. Ž1997.: ‘‘Dual Reduction and Elementary Games,’’ Games and Economic Beha¨ ior,
  21, 183᎐202.
NAU, R. F., AND K. F. MCCARDLE Ž1990.: ‘‘Coherent Behavior in Noncooperative Games,’’ Journal
  of Economic Theory, 50, 424᎐444.
ROBINSON, J. Ž1951.: ‘‘An Iterative Method of Solving a Game,’’ Annals of Mathematics, 54, 296᎐301.
ROTH, A. E., AND I. EREV Ž1995.: ‘‘Learning in Extensive-Form Games: Experimental Data and
  Simple Dynamic Models in the Intermediate Term,’’ Games and Economic Beha¨ ior, 8, 164᎐212.
SANCHIRICO, C. W. Ž1996.: ‘‘A Probabilistic Model of Learning in Games,’’ Econometrica, 64,
  1375᎐1393.
