                                                         Evolutionary dynamics of higher-order
arXiv:2001.10313v5 [physics.soc-ph] 22 May 2021




                                                             interactions in social networks
                                                    Unai Alvarez-Rodriguez1,2,* , Federico Battiston3,4 , Guilherme
                                                  Ferraz de Arruda5 , Yamir Moreno5,6,7 , Matjaž Perc8,9,10 , and Vito
                                                                            Latora2,11,12
                                                   1
                                                      Basque Centre for Climate Change (BC3), 48940, Leioa, Spain
                                                       2
                                                         School of Mathematical Sciences, Queen Mary University of
                                                                        London, London E1 4NS, UK
                                                      3
                                                        Department of Network and Data Science, Central European
                                                                          University, Vienna, Austria
                                                        4
                                                          Department of Anthropology, University of Zurich, Zurich,
                                                                                   Switzerland
                                                                         5
                                                                           ISI Foundation, Turin, Italy
                                                    6
                                                      Institute for Biocomputation and Physics of Complex Systems,
                                                                University of Zaragoza, Zaragoza 50008, Spain
                                                       7
                                                         Department of Theoretical Physics, University of Zaragoza,
                                                                             Zaragoza 50009, Spain
                                                       8
                                                         Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, University of
                                                            Maribor, Koroška cesta 160, 2000 Maribor, Slovenia
                                                       9
                                                         Department of Medical Research, China Medical University
                                                           Hospital, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan
                                                      10
                                                         Complexity Science Hub Vienna, Josefstädterstraße 39, 1080
                                                                                 Vienna, Austria
                                                  11
                                                     Dipartimento di Fisica ed Astronomia, Università di Catania and
                                                                          INFN, 95123 Catania, Italy
                                                    12
                                                       The Alan Turing Institute, The British Library, London, NW1
                                                                                    2DB, UK
                                                              *
                                                                Corresponding author: Unai Alvarez-Rodriguez
                                                  (unaialvarezr@gmail.com; ORCID linked to account on Manuscript
                                                                                Tracking System)

                                                                             May 25, 2021



                                                                                   1
Abstract
We live and cooperate in networks. However, links in networks only
allow for pairwise interactions, thus making the framework suitable
for dyadic games, but not for games that are played in groups of
more than two players. Here, we study the evolutionary dynamics of
a public goods game in social systems with higher-order interactions.
First, we show that the game on uniform hypergraphs corresponds
to the replicator dynamics in the well-mixed limit, providing a for-
mal theoretical foundation to study cooperation in networked groups.
Secondly, we unveil how the presence of hubs and the coexistence of
interactions in groups of different sizes affects the evolution of co-
operation. Finally, we apply the proposed framework to extract the
actual dependence of the synergy factor on the size of a group from
real-world collaboration data in science and technology. Our work
provides a way to implement informed actions to boost cooperation
in social groups.


Introduction
Cooperation among unrelated individuals distinguishes humans markedly from
other mammals, and it is one of the central pillars of our evolutionary success [1].
Past research has emphasized that the structure of social interactions is crucial
for the evolution of cooperation, but thus far predominantly in the realm of
networks where links connect pairs of players [2, 3]. However, since cooperation
often unfolds in groups, the need for a paradigm shift in the way we model
social interactions is evident and indeed urgent. Regardless of the model that
we use to describe human interactions, cooperation remains at odds with the
fundamental principles of Darwinian evolution, and it is fascinating that we
have succeeded in collectively holding off self-interest over most of the last two
million years, ever since the genus Homo first emerged [4].
    Given this puzzle, the search for reasons and mechanisms that may allow
cooperation to evolve and proliferate is an evergreen and vibrant subject across
the social and natural sciences [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. Evolutionary game theory
is long established as the theory of choice for addressing the puzzle mathemat-
ically [12, 13, 14], wherein social dilemmas constitute a particularly important
class of games. Namely, social dilemmas capture the essence of the problem
since defection is the individually optimal strategy, whilst cooperation is the
optimal strategy for the highest social welfare [15]. An important mechanism
for cooperation in social dilemmas is network reciprocity [16], which stands for
the fact that a limited interaction range, as dictated by lattices or other types of
networks, facilitates the formation of compact clusters of cooperators that are
in this way protected against invading defectors. This basic mechanism could
also be seen if the degree distribution of the interaction network is strongly
heterogeneous [17, 18, 19], if there is set or community structure [20, 21], or



                                         2
if the evolution unfolds on two or more network layers that mutually support
cooperative clusters [22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29].
    Despite the wealth of important insights concerning the evolution of co-
operation on networks and fundamental discoveries [30, 31, 32], an important
unsolved problem remains accounting for cooperation in groups, such as for
example in the public goods game (PGG) [33, 34]. The simplest remedy is to
consider members of a group to be all the players that are pairwise-connected to
a central player [35, 36]. However, since the other players are further connected
in a pairwise manner, one would also need to consider all the groups in which the
central player is a member but is not central. Evidently, classical networks do
not provide a unique procedure for defining a group. Moreover, members of the
same group are commonly not all directly connected with one another, which
prevents strategy changes among them, either in terms of imitation, replication,
or exploration. These facts posit a lack of common theoretical foundation for
studying the evolution of cooperation in networked groups. Without knowing
who is connected to whom in a group, it is also impossible to implement fun-
damental mechanisms that promote cooperation, such as reciprocity [37, 38],
image scoring [39, 40, 41], and reputation [42, 43, 44].
    As a solution, we here introduce and study higher-order interactions in evolu-
tionary games that are played in groups. The distinctive feature of higher-order
interactions is that, unlike in classical networks [45], a link can connect more
than just two individuals [46]. Thus, higher-order networks naturally account
for structured group interactions [47], wherein a group is simply made up of all
players that are connected by a so-called hyperlink, which is the higher-order
analogous of the link. As a paradigmatic example, we consider a standard public
goods game on the higher-order analogous of a network, referred to as a hyper-
graph, see Figure 1. We first show that it corresponds exactly to the replicator
dynamics in the well-mixed limit as long as no hyperdegree-hyperdegree corre-
lations exist. As such, it thus provides a formal theoretical foundation to study
cooperation in networked groups – effectively a null model – that is amenable to
further upgrades. Next, we consider the public goods game on hypergraphs with
heterogeneity either in their node hyperdegrees (number of hyperlinks a node
is involved into) or in the order of their hyperlinks (number of nodes that form
each hyperlink), which allow us to describe the dynamics induced by the pres-
ence of highly connected players and to consider scenarios in which the synergy
factor depends on the group size in a systematic and consistent way. We show,
for example, how synergy factors that are given by different powers of the group
size lead to a critical scaling in the transition from defection to cooperation.
Lastly, we also demonstrate how the proposed higher-order interaction frame-
work can be used to determine the synergy factor as a function of the group size
from empirical data on cooperation and collaborations. Under the assumption
that the structure of the hypergraph is the outcome of an optimisation process
of the game it hosts, we extract the game parameters from datasets describing
collaborations in science and technology, showing that higher-order interactions
induce diverse benefits and costs in different social domains.
    The public goods game constitutes the fundamental example of a social


                                        3
dilemma when multiple individuals interact simultaneously. It presents a sit-
uation where the gain or loss of an initial investment is shared symmetrically
between the members of a group, even if the investment itself can be asymmet-
ric. In other words, there is no correlation between the individual effort and the
distribution of the reward, meaning that some players receive more than what
they give or deserve, while some others receive less. Metaphorically, one would
say that the game has no memory, in the sense that the payoff is assigned blindly
to all the players as if the system had lost the information about the original
contribution of each player. More formally, the public goods game describes a
setting where N players are requested to contribute to a common pool with a
token of value c [10].
    Cooperators do contribute, and defectors do not. The collected amount is
then multiplied by the so-called synergy factor R, and the benefit is shared
amongst all the members of the group. The payoff for the defectors and co-
operators playing in a group of g members is given by πD = RcwC /g and
πC = RcwC /g − c respectively, with wC representing the number of cooperators
in the group. Typically c has a fixed value of c = 1, so that the behaviour of
the system is determined by the synergy factor R, or the reduced synergy factor
r = R/g. Besides, it is common to represent the state of the system by the
fraction of players adopting each strategy, xC for the cooperators and xD for
the defectors.
    The evolutionary dynamics determines how the strategies of the players
evolve with each iteration of the PGG, that is, how the fractions xC and xD
change with time. Here, we implement the so-called fixed cost per game ap-
proach, where cooperators contribute with an entire token to each game they
play. Individual updates constitute micro-steps of the dynamics, whereas a
(global) time step corresponds to N individual steps, so that all the players in
the system have the chance to play the game and update their strategies. Play-
ers interact among them following the links of the network they are embedded
in. As mentioned before, the standard network implementation [35], henceforth
referred to as graph implementation (GI), is not able to account for the most
general type of interaction in groups. One of the first proposals to overcome the
limitation of a GI is Evolutionary Set Theory [20], that considers a structure of
interaction in which the players are organised as the elements of a set. Yet, the
game itself is pairwise, and thus different from the type of approach proposed
here. However, it is worth pointing out that the set theory description is equiv-
alent to the hypergraph formalism, and therefore, one should expect the same
results when studying the same game on both structures. In this work we have
opted for hypergraphs because, as a higher-order generalization of graphs, they
inherit the whole family of graph tools with which evolutionary game theory
scholars are more familiar with. A few years later, it was proposed to address
higher-order interactions by bipartite graphs, having a set of nodes for the play-
ers and a second set for the groups [48, 49, 50]. The authors adapted the PGG to
the bipartite graph, in what we call the bipartite implementation (BI). In such a
case the game is indeed polyadic, but the update process is still dyadic, and the
constrains associated to the formalism do not make it suitable for an analytical


                                        4
treatment. Here, we generalise the BI to a fully higher-order implementation
and provide the theoretical foundation to study higher-order cooperative games
in uniform and heterogeneous hypergraphs. Finally, we mention that in a more
recent work [51], the authors have considered games played by agents belonging
to subpopulations and whose interactions occur across and within the popula-
tion, providing a useful methodology for situations in which one can get rid of
the fine details of the individual connections.


Results
Game Implementation
In order to account for higher-order interactions, we use hypergraphs [46]. A
hypergraph, H(N , L), is a mathematical object that consists of a set of N
nodes N = {n1 = 1, .., nN = N } and a set of L hyperlinks L = {l1 , ..., lL }.
Each hyperlink is a subset of two or more elements of N and represents a group
interaction. For instance, in Figure 1a, the hyperlink l1 contains nodes n1 and
n3 , whereas the hyperlink l3 is the subset made up by nodes n4 , n5 and n6 .
Furthermore, the cardinality of a subset, known as the order of the hyperlink,
is the number g of nodes in the group. In the previous example, l1 has order 2
and l3 has order 3. In a hypergraph, the hyperdegree, ki , of a node i represents
the number of hyperlinks in which the node is involved into, thus, the number
of groups of a specific order g that contains i can be denoted by kig . Hence, the
                                     Pg +
hyperdegree of i is given as ki = g=g− kig , where g − and g + account for the
minimal and maximal orders in L. For example, in Figure 1a, k4 = 3 = k42 + k43 ,
with k42 = 1 (the hyperlink l4 ) and k43 = 2 (the hyperlinks l2 and l3 ). As hki
we indicate the average hyperdegree of node i, P where the averages are evaluated
over all the nodes in the system, i.e. hki = N1 i∈N ki .
    Although hypergraphs are not the only possible representation of group in-
teractions, they allow exploiting the analogy between the links representing
pairwise interactions in contact networks and hyperlinks, which are based on
higher-order, group interactions. As we will show next, the differences between
these two approaches lead to fundamentally distinct outcomes of the PGG evo-
lutionary dynamics. To see how the evolutionary dynamics evolves in hyper-
graphs, let us consider the first step of a standard graph implementation of the
PGG. When a node ni and one of its neighbours nj are selected on a graph,
it is equivalent to say that a node and one of its links are selected. Such a
procedure can be easily generalised to group interactions of more than g = 2
individuals, see Figure 1b. Note that if we choose more neighbours of ni to gen-
erate higher-order interactions, such an extension would still be based on dyadic
ones. Instead, we propose a hypergraph implementation (HI) of the game that
consists of selecting one of the hyperlinks of ni . That is, in the HI setup, we
select at random with uniform probability a node ni in the hypergraph and one
of its hyperlinks, li . Then, all the members of the hyperlink li play a game for
each of the hyperlinks they are part of, as illustrated in Figure 1. Finally, as it


                                        5
is customary, the nodes accumulate the payoffs of all the rounds they play, and
we normalise this quantity by the total number of played games, such that each
node’s performance is represented by its average payoff.
    The second part of each micro-step of the evolutionary dynamics of the
game involves updating the strategy of node ni . To this end, we normalise
the discrete replicator dynamics for the case of higher-order interactions. We
propose to compare the payoff πi of a node ni with the maximal payoff of the
selected hyperlink li . Under this rule, ni will adopt the strategy of the node
                                             1
with the maximal payoff with a probability ∆   [(maxli πj ) − πi ], where ∆, whose
precise definition is provided in Equation (9), accounts for the maximal payoff
difference, and is employed to guarantee that the probability is normalised.
The rationale behind the choice of this expression is that node i will compare
its payoff to that of the node with the largest payoff in hyperlink li . Note that
the previous expression reduces to the standard one of the GI when g = 2.
Summing up, the HI accounts for a more realistic update than that in the BI,
since the player inspiring a strategy change is the one with the highest payoff
of the group, and not a randomly chosen one.

Uniform Hypergraphs
To get some insights into the dynamics of the system in a simple configuration,
we first studied the PGG on uniform random hypergraphs (URH) with hyper-
links of order equal to g =2, 3, 4 and 5 (see Methods for details on how to
generate URH). Numerical simulations have been carried out for hypergraphs
with N = 1000 nodes (players), and the game has been iterated for T = 104
time steps. The results obtained are reported in Fig. 2. Panel (a) shows the
final fraction of cooperators as a function of the reduced synergy factor r. In
each case, the simulations refer to hypergraphs with L = Lc hyperlinks, where
Lc accounts for the minimal number of hyperlinks that guarantees the connect-
edness of the hypergraph. As it can be seen in the figure, there is a value of r
beyond which cooperation emerges. We define this critical value of the reduced
synergy factor, rc , which depends on g, as the lowest value of r for which the
fraction of cooperators is nonzero.
    The results show that rc decreases when the order g of the hyperlinks of
the hypergraph increases. This is equivalent to say that rc decreases when the
same number of N = 1000 individuals play in larger groups. We believe that
this observation is important, since determining how r varies with the size of
the group, allows us to get more realistic insights. Admittedly, the well-mixed
limit of population-size groups is rarely applicable in reality, thus, the study of
the impact of having large groups inside large populations, as allowed by our
higher-order framework, is key. The panel (b) of Fig. 2 displays how the value
of rc depends on the number of hyperlinks L in the hypergraphs. For each value
of g, we observe an increase of rc with L, and a tendency, for large hypergraph
densities, to the value rc = 1, which corresponds to the well-mixed replicator
approximation [52]. The replicator equation approximation relies on the indis-
tinguishability of the nodes, and as such, it is exact when the hypergraph is fully


                                        6
a)                                           b)                                      l1      l2
                  n1                                              n1
     n2     l1                                              l1                       l3      l4
                                                    n2
          l 2 n3                                          l 2 n3
              n4                                              n4
                            l 3 n5                                          l 3 n5

             l4                n6                            l4                n6

                                     l5 n9                                           l5 n9
                       n7                                              n7
                                     n8                                              n8

 Figure 1: Higher-order vs pairwise interactions in a Public Goods Game (PGG).
 Comparison of the proposed hypergraph implementation (HI) with a standard
 graph implementation (GI) of the game based on pairwise interactions only. (a)
 In the HI implementation, a node, n2 , and one of its hyperlinks, l2 , are randomly
 selected. All the nodes in l2 , namely node n2 , and the two nodes highlighted in
 red n3 and n4 , play all the games they are involved in, corresponding, in this
 example, to PGG defined for the subset of nodes of the hyperlinks l1 , l2 , l3 and
 l4 . Then, the strategy of n2 is updated by comparing its payoff with that of
 the node with the highest accumulated payoff of the hyperlink l2 . This is not
 equivalent to play the PGG in the graph generated by projecting the interactions
 of the hypergraph, which is shown in (b). In the standard GI implementation,
 a neighbour of n2 , let us say n3 −highlighted in red− is randomly selected. The
 two nodes n2 and n3 then play all the games of the groups they are part of,
 that is, of the groups made up by the subsets of nodes {n1 , n3 }, {n2 , n3 , n4 },
 {n1 , n2 , n3 , n4 } and {n2 , n3 , n4 , n5 , n6 , n7 }. These subsets, coloured as indicated
 in the figure, could be represented by a different set of hyperlinks ¯l1 , ¯l2 , ¯l3 and
¯l4 , respectively, which are different from the set of hyperlinks of the original
 hypergraph. Finally, the strategy of n2 is updated by comparing its accumulated
 payoff to that of node n3 .


connected, i.e. contains all the possible hyperlinks. However, we show that the
approximation is good also for sparse hypergraphs, with a number of hyperlinks
of the order of the critical value for ensuring a giant component. Therefore it is
natural that the higher the value of L, the closer rc is to 1. The same argument
can be used to explain the results in (a). The ratio Lc /CgN , which represents
the fraction between the critical number of hyperlinks Lc and the total possible
number of hyperlinks, given by the binomial coefficient CgN , decreases with g.
This implies that, if two hypergraphs have L = Lc , but different values of g, the
one with lower g will be denser, and thus will exhibit a critical point closer to the
analytic prediction. Therefore, we can say that at fixed reduced synergy factor
r, large groups are better to foster cooperation in sparse hypergraphs, as the


                                              7
a)                          b)                          c)




Figure 2: Public Goods Game with higher-order interactions in uniform random
hypergraphs. Numerical simulation of the Hypergraph Implementation of the
game on uniform random hypergraphs of N = 1000 players and different orders
g. (a) Fraction of cooperators, xC , as a function of the synergy factor, r, for
hypergraphs with hyperdegree hki = kc , or total number of hyperlinks L = Lc ,
where kc and Lc stand for the critical hyperdegree or number of hyperlinks
guaranteeing a connected hypergraph. (b) Critical value of the synergy factor,
rc , as a function of the ratio between the number of hyperlinks L and the critical
value Lc in hypergraphs of different density. (c) Relaxation times as a function
of the synergy factor, r, for hypergraphs with hyperdegree hki = 5kc . In all
plots, triangles correspond to numerical simulations, while the solid lines are
the results of our theoretical predictions.


number of hyperlinks required for connecting all the players represents a smaller
fraction of the total number of hyperlinks. Finally, the value of r also influences
how long it takes for the system to converge to the stationary solution. This is
illustrated in panel (c), where we report the measured relaxation time T from
an initial configuration with xD = xC = 0.5, in a hypergraph with L = 5Lc .
These results are obtained by running the simulations up to a maximum of 104
steps. Furthermore, for the replicator approximation, the value of T can be
                                     −1)
analytically computed as T = ln(N  |Q|   , with Q = (1 − r)/∆ (see Equations (10)
and (11) for the details of the calculation). As it can be seen in the figure, the
agreement between the theoretical predictions and the numerical results is not
only qualitatively but also quantitatively very good. The absorbing state, either
full cooperation or full defection, emerges when the system is at equilibrium, a
condition that can only be reached if enough iterations have occurred. On the
other hand, real-world social interactions that can be modelled as games usu-
ally take place over a limited time interval τ . Hence, the relation between the
relaxation time T , which depends on the synergy factor r, and τ is crucial to de-
termine if the system does or does not reach the equilibrium, and consequently,
if the replicator dynamics can or cannot predict the numerically computed frac-
tion of cooperators. All these results indicate that the dynamics of the PGG
on uniform random hypergraphs corresponds to the replicator dynamics in the
well-mixed limit. In order to test the robustness of these findings with respect
to the implementation selection, we have also carried out numerical simulations
in the BI implementation (see Figure 6).



                                        8
Hyperdegree-Heterogeneous Hypergraphs
The previous section addressed the simplest scenario in which the individuals
of a population are assumed to be indistinguishable (URH). However, such an
assumption can be too oversimplified to describe real situations as it is well
known that social systems are heterogeneous. Think of your friends at college.
It is likely that a minority of those are involved in considerably more activi-
ties, and therefore social circles, than the rest. Such heterogeneity is typically
characterised by a non-exponential degree distribution, allowing the presence of
hubs, or highly connected individuals [45]. Hence, we consider here two families
of hyperdegree-heterogeneous hypergraphs that we name power random hyper-
graphs (PRH) and scale-free random hypergraphs (SRH). The algorithms we
have used to generate these hypergraphs are reported in the Methods section,
and their properties have been studied in Figure 7 and Figure 8. Scale-free
hypergraphs are characterised by a power-law distribution, and represent the
most hyperdegree-heterogeneous family of hypergraph considered here. For this
reason, these hypergraphs display a hierarchy between the nodes, as a few of
them are involved in most of the hyperlinks and thus have a dominant position
in the dynamics of the system. In contrast, power random hypergraphs stay in
between uniform and scale-free hypergraphs, as their hyperdegree distribution
combines exponential and non-exponential functions.
    To study the emergence of cooperators in hyperdegree-heterogeneous hyper-
graphs, we have run T = 104 time steps of the game on ensembles of hypergraphs
with N = 1000 nodes and orders g = 2, 3, 4, 5, respectively sampled from PRH
and SRH. In order to compare the simulations with those reported in Fig 2a,
we have fixed the total number of hyperlinks to L = Lc . When, for high het-
erogeneity, some of the nodes (a minimal fraction of the total) do not belong
to the main component, we have neglected their contribution to the fraction of
cooperators.
    The results reported in Fig. 3 show an important difference between PRH
and SRH. In the case of PRH (top panels) the position of the transition does
not depend on the heterogeneity of the node hyperdegree distribution, tuned
by parameter µ, (see Methods for the precise definition of µ), and the critical
point is the same as that obtained in URH. Conversely, the simulation of the
game on SRH (bottom panels) shows that, the larger the heterogeneity in the
hyperdegree distribution (larger values of µ), the more the solution deviates from
that of URH, and the closer the critical point gets to r = 1. This indicates that
hierarchically structured systems inhibit cooperation in the PGG with higher-
order interactions at variance with numerical simulations obtained on traditional
networks under the same evolutionary dynamics.
    In order to be able to explain these results we need to consider a refinement
of the replicator approximation that takes into account the possible presence of
correlations between the hyperdegrees of nodes belonging to the same hyperlink.
Let K be the set of all possible hyperdegrees a node can have, and let k ∈ K
be the hyperdegree of a randomly chosen node. We now denote as p(k00 |k) the
conditional probability that the node of hyperdegree k is part of a hyperlink


                                        9
a)                   b)                   c)                    d)




e)                   f)                   g)                    h)




Figure 3: Public Goods Game with higher-order interactions in hyperdegree-
heterogeneous random hypergraphs. Numerical simulation for the fraction of
cooperators xC as a function of the reduced synergy factor r on hyperdegree-
heterogeneous random hypergraphs of N = 1000 players and different orders
g. Top and bottom panels refer respectively to PRHs and scale-free random
hypergraphs Random Hypergraphs (SRH), while the four different columns (a)-
(e), (b)-(f), (c)-(g) and (d)-(h) correspond to the values of g = 2, 3, 4, 5. Legends
in the PRH and SRH plots denote the value of µ characterising the hyperdegree
distribution, where larger values µ imply higher heterogeneity.


where the remaining g − 1 nodes have hyperdegrees k00 = {k1 , k2 , . . . , kg−1 },
where k00 ∈ Kg−1 is a vector whose g − 1 components are elements of K. We
have been able to show that the system will fulfil the replicator approximation as
long as the conditional probability p(k00 |k) does not depend on k (see Equation
(12) and the section below it for the detailed analysis). This is true for the case
of the PRH. Conversely, in the case of the SRH, increasing heterogeneity while
maintaining the total number of hyperlinks in the hypergraph requires reducing
the number of effective nodes. This induces non-trivial correlations in the model
between the hyperdegrees of nodes belonging to the same hyperlink, and has a
similar effect of driving the system closer to the rc = 1 threshold, as that we have
observed when we increase the hyperlink density in the uniform case (URH).
Intuitively this can be explained by the notion of locality. When the density is
low, or when no large hubs are present in the system, there is a non-negligible
probability that cooperator bubbles emerge below the critical threshold, because
there may be regions of the hypergraph that are semi-isolated, and therefore
protected from defectors, even if they belong to the same component. However,
either increasing the density or introducing hubs will reduce the probability of
finding these isolated groups of nodes, and therefore will inhibit the formation
of cooperator bubbles below r = 1.




                                         10
Order-Heterogeneous Hypergraphs
Heterogeneity can also arise in the order of the hyperlinks. Indeed, the proposed
HI of the PGG allows studying the more general, realistic and interesting case
of hypergraphs where not all the hyperlinks have the same order. Important
examples of such systems include teams of different sizes working for a common
goal or one-to-many communication via apps like WhatsApp, where users can
create and belong to several groups of different sizes. In what follows, we con-
sider order-heterogeneous random hypergraphs with an assigned distribution of
hyperlinks. Such hypergraphs are characterised by their total number of hy-
                                                       +
perlinks L and by a probability vector p = {pg }gg=g− , whose entry pg = k g /k
specifies how likely it is, on average, that the hyperdegree k of the node contains
                                                       Pg +
k g groups of order g. p is normalised such that g=g− pg = 1. Considering
groups of different orders in the same hypergraph allows us to focus on another
important aspect of the PGG on higher-order structures, namely, the possible
dependence of the rescaled synergy factor r on the order of the group. This is
important for practical purposes, given the increasing interest in understanding
how the size of a group impacts its performance. As it has been shown recently
[53], large and small teams play different roles in science and technology ecosys-
tems. Thus, it is natural to assume that the synergy factor of a group depends
on its size. This is particularly true in scientific publications, where it has been
shown that the larger the group, the more citations a produced publication is
likely to attract [54, 55]. Therefore, as a general form for such a dependence
we assume that the synergy factor R is an increasing power-law function of g,
namely:
                                     R(g) = αg β                                 (1)
with parameter α > 0 and exponent β ≥ 0. The value of the exponent allows to
tune the benefit that the players are able to produce when working as a group. In
particular, adopting a superlinear scaling β > 1, means considering a synergistic
effect of a group that goes beyond the sum of the individual contributions [56,
57]. Notice, however, that the assumed dependence in Eq. (1) is only a first
approximation as it neglects saturation effects or even possible disadvantages
due to difficulties in coordinating large groups, which, as we will see later on,
appear in real systems. Under this assumption, the average payoff difference
between cooperation and defection can be written as:
                                      g+
                                      X
                         πD − πC =           pg (1 − αg β−1 )                   (2)
                                      g=g−

where g− and g+ are again the minimal and maximal orders of hyperlinks,
respectively. The relaxation time is again given by T = ln(N − 1)/|Q|, where
Q = (πD − πC )/∆ (see the Appendix for the definition of ∆ in the general case
and for explicit calculations). It is then possible to derive the critical value of
the parameter α as a function of the exponent β as:
                                          1           1
                         αc (β) = Pg+       g  β−1
                                                   =    ,                       (3)
                                      g=g− p g       Kβ

                                        11
                                                   Pg+
where, for simplicity, we have defined Kβ ≡ g=g          −
                                                           pg g β−1 . We remark here
that α = αc for a fixed value of β is the critical point separating the defection
and cooperation phases. This means that when α < αc the system will converge
to full defection, while for α > αc it will converge to full cooperation.
    To explore how the dynamics evolves in order-heterogeneous random hy-
pergraphs, we have performed numerical simulations of the PGG considering
four different values of g = 2, 3, 4 and 5 and allowing the values of pg to take
only multiples of 0.25. This leads to 35 possible hypergraphs, one for each
of all conceivable convex sums of {p2 , p3 , p4 , p5 } with the previous constraints.
This means that the hypergraphs we consider are composed by hyperlinks of
different orders, where each order g takes Lpg hyperlinks out of the total num-
ber L. For instance, on a hypergraph with L = 100 and order probabilities
(0, 0.25, 0.25, 0.5), on average we would expect 25 hyperlinks of order g = 3,
another 25 of order g = 4 and the remaining 50 of order g = 5. Results are
reported in Fig. 4 for four different values of the power exponent β, namely,
β = 0, 1, 2, 3, shown with different colours. Notice that the case β = 1 corre-
sponds to the underlying linear assumption of the standard PGG: in this case,
α plays the role of the reduced synergy factor r. Panels a) through d) plot
the colour-coded fraction of cooperators as a function of the parameter α in
the definition of the synergy factor. The hypergraphs Hi have hki = 2kc and
are displayed according to their value of Kβ , i.e., the value of the critical point
αc (β). As for the case of uniform random hypergraphs, we find that although
the critical point is slightly overestimated for low densities by the analytical ap-
proximation, there is still a good agreement between the theoretical predictions
of the well-mixed replicator approximation and the numerical simulations. We
next explore the behaviour of the relaxation time. Panels e) through h) show
results obtained for order-heterogeneous hypergraphs with hki = 5kc . As it was
done for the homogeneous scenario, we follow the dynamics of the system up to
a maximum of T = 104 time steps. The plots show that the relaxation times
depend on α for all values of β 6= 1, albeit rather differently with respect to the
dependence of the critical value αc for β < 1 and β > 1. In order to further
explore this relationship, we analysed how the average relaxation time varies as
a function of the critical point αc . Results shown in panels i) to l) reveal that
the dependence is always linear. However, when the synergy factor increases su-
per linearly, there appear different curves, each one corresponding to a distinct
family of hypergraphs and characterised by a different linear relation between
the average relaxation time and the critical value. This behaviour introduces
an additional degree of freedom that can turn very useful, since the degeneracy
that is observed for β ≤ 1 is broken for β > 1, and therefore one can inde-
pendently set a critical point and a relaxation time by opportunely choosing
the corresponding hypergraph. We remind the reader that cases with β > 1
are those in which the synergy factor r(g) has a superlinear dependence on the
order g. Those values of β are a priori the most interesting ones to study, and
the ones more likely to be found in real situations. Therefore, our results about
the relaxation are particularly relevant, because in this case one can potentially
turn an unstable system into a stable one, and the opposite, by changing the

                                         12
order of the hyperlinks, while still respecting the value of the critical point.

a)                   b)                    c)                   d)




e)                   f)                      g)                 h)




i)                   j)                      k)                  l)




Figure 4: Public Goods Game with higher-order interactions in order-
heterogeneous random hypergraphs. We assume that the synergy factor grows
according to Eq. (1) and consider the set of hypergraphs Hi that contain hy-
perlinks of orders g = {2, 3, 4, 5} with probabilities pg taking values in the set
{0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1} −there are 35 possible such hypergraphs. (a-d) Fraction of
cooperators as a function of α for each of the 35 hypergraphs Hi and several
values of β. The hypergraphs are ordered according to their value of Kβ . Sim-
ulations have been carried out up to T = 104 time steps for hypergraphs with
hki = 2kc , and triangles correspond to the theoretical predictions in the repli-
cator approximation (see the Appendix for details). (e-h) Relaxation time as a
function of α for the set of hypergraphs Hi . Now hypergraphs have hki = 5kc .
(i-l) Predictions for the critical value αc as a function of the average relaxation
time, calculated for each hypergraph in Hi by averaging over the intervals of α
[0,8], [0,2], [0,1] and [0,0.5] for β = 0, 1, 2, 3 respectively.



Synergy factor of real games
From the previous results, a natural question arises: is it possible to determine
the value of the synergy factor for a real PGG for each of the possible group
sizes? A plausible answer to this question can be obtained under the assumption
that the very same structure of the hypergraph is the result of an evolutionary
process in which nodes select the groups they belong to. We hypothesise that


                                        13
each individual tries to optimise the ideal number of groups of each order, based
on the perceived dependence of the synergy factor on the group size. In this
way, each real-world hypergraph would be the optimal structure that supports
the game it hosts. We could then extract the functional form R(g) directly
from the hyperdegree distribution of the hypergraph. More precisely, the goal
would be to use the information in the vector p of the hypergraphs on which the
PGG occurs to determine the functional form, R(g), of the synergy factor by
imposing two conditions. The first condition comes from the assumption that
the unknown reduced synergy factor r(g) is proportional to pg . This originates
in the intuition that the distribution of the hyperdegree of a generic player
should be aligned with the potential benefit that each player expects to obtain
for each higher-order interaction. The second condition imposes that the average
payoff of cooperators is equal to the average payoff of defectors. This implies
that the system is at equilibrium and guarantees the coexistence of cooperators
and defectors. Thus, given that these two conditions are satisfied, it is possible
to extract the curves of r(g) and R(g) from empirical data on higher-order
interactions.

                                                 8
                    1
                    2                        9                                         9
                    3                        10
                    4                                                                    1
                                             11                                                  6
                    5                                                                  11
                                                  12                   13          5
                    6                                                       3 12             7
                                                                   8                   2
                                              13          4   10
                7




Figure 5: Synergy factors of scientific collaborations. (a) Empirical synergy
factors extracted from the structure of hypergraphs describing co-authorships
from publications in the American Physical Society journals. Solid lines are fit
of the empirical dots according to Eq. (6). Different symbols and colours refer to
different journals, i.e. to different scientific communities. (b) Journal (labelled
from 1 to 13) positions in the costs-benefits diagram. The synergy factors are
factorized as a function of two competing terms, one modeling the benefits of
cooperation, which is dominant for small group size, and another one accounting
for costs associated to an excessively large number of co-authors, which describes
for the exponential decays observed in the first two panels.

    In order to show how the above-mentioned procedure works in practice in real
cases, we have studied collaboration in science and technology. We believe that
this could constitute an example in which the benefit of a group depends on its
size and at the same time, all group members do not contribute the same to the
collective task, which essentially leads to a PGG dynamics. Although there is
not a single way of classifying in a binary manner (either cooperator or defector)
the authors of a scientific publication, one can think of two type of players
mimicking cooperators and defectors. A cooperator can be considered as anyone


                                        14
that has contributed at least a “fair” amount of work. The reverse applies to
defectors, which can be considered those that put less effort in producing a
teamwork than the average or the “fair” amount of work. Note that whatever
the effort of the team members is, they all receive the same benefit, for instance,
in terms of citations (the citation is to the paper, not to the individual). Thus,
given that there are cooperators and defectors, what is the optimal collaboration
(group) size? And that of the synergy factor?
     In particular, we have considered a large data set of all the scientific articles
published in the last century in thirteen journals of the American Physical So-
ciety (APS). For each journal, we have constructed a hypergraph whose nodes
and hyperlinks represent respectively scientists and co-authored publications
(see Table 1 for further details). The reduced synergy factors have then been
obtained from information on the number of authors in each publication (see
Methods). From the plots of r(g) vs g reported in Fig. 5a we notice the exis-
tence of a maximum value of r at intermediate group orders g. This indicates
that there is an optimal trade-off between the positive and negative effects of
increasing the group size. The optimal value of g depends on the specific scien-
tific community, as it varies from journal to journal. In the case of PhysRevLett
the maximum of r(g) is located at g = 3. Different journals are associated
with other optimal collaboration sizes. For instance, for PhysRevApplied r(g)
is maximum at g = 5, indicating that larger collaborations are more beneficial
in applied topics, such as device physics, electronics and industrial physics. For
almost all journals, the synergy factor is low for g = 1, showcasing the difficulty
of publishing alone in physics, a research area where teamwork has been becom-
ing increasingly important in the last decades [58]. Interestingly, a paradigmatic
case is the one of PhysRevSeriesI, the very first journal published by the APS
in the early 1900s, for which a sharp peak is located at g = 1, showing how
most publications where produced by single scientists, in contrast with current
trends. In order to shed light on this result we have factorised the synergy
factor as the product of an increasing function of g times a decreasing function
of g, and we have performed a numerical fit to extract the benefit exponent β
and the so-called cost parameter γ (see Methods). This enables us to interpret
the synergy factor as a combination of two contrary effects of the higher-order
interactions in this particular dataset.
     Fig. 5b reports the values of β and γ obtained for each journal of the APS,
and it allows us to classify the different scientific communities in terms of benefits
and costs of higher-order interactions. These results provide a game-theoretic in-
terpretation of the APS dataset. Specifically, in the context of this bibliographic
dataset, hidden benefits and costs that conform to the synergy factor can be
associated with several aspects of the task of producing a publication. Benefits
(an increase of the synergy factor with increasing g) would correspond to the
potential reinforcement of the amount and quality of the ideas and the potential
increase in the outreach of the work with the number of co-authors involved.
On the contrary, the costs (decrease with increasing g) would be the additional
organisational effort in the process of arriving at a consensus and carrying out
the tasks for publishing a paper. Experimental communities, such as that of


                                         15
nuclear physicists publishing in PhysRevC, tend to have low costs. These ideas
are aligned with recent studies about the creation and production of research
ideas [59] and the role, group dynamics and success of teams [53, 54, 55]. Our
formalism allows for a quantitative analysis of these phenomena and could be
used in future applications to design ways to foster higher-order cooperation.


Discussion
Summing up, we have introduced higher-order interactions in evolutionary games
to study cooperation in groups. Since higher-order interactions allow for a single
link to connect more than just two individuals, they are naturally suitable to
define groups in networks. In doing so, higher-order interactions thus do away
with the arbitrary definitions of groups in classical networks, and they provide
a formal theoretical foundation to study cooperation in networked groups. We
have shown that the public goods game on a hypergraph is effectively a null
model that agrees exactly with the replicator dynamics in the well-mixed limit
as long as no hyperdegree-hyperdegree correlations exist. As such, it can be
used in future research towards upgrades that add additional layers of reality in
models of human cooperation, either by means of strategic complexity [10], or
by means of more complex interaction networks [60].
    Towards the latter effect, we have also studied the public goods game on
hyperdegree-heterogeneous and on order-heterogeneous hypergraphs, where we
study the effects of the presence of highly connected individuals and of hyper-
links of different orders respectively. Due to the exact definition of a group in
the proposed framework, we have been able to systematically and consistently
consider synergy factors that are dependent on group size. Indeed, the frame-
work allows us to unveil the effects of group size on cooperation in its most
general form. As an example, we have considered synergy factors that are given
by different powers of the group size, showing a critical scaling in the transition
from defection to cooperation. In this case too, we have observed a substan-
tial agreement between the simulations and the analytical predictions of the
model. Interestingly, we found that hierarchically structured hypergraphs could
hinder cooperation in a structured population. Our framework enables analysis
of real systems, as we have shown for the APS publications dataset, providing
insights regarding the positive and negative effects associated to higher-order
interactions and the nature of group dynamics. However, even if our framework
includes diverse forms of higher-order interactions, we recognize that a current
limitation of this representation of human interactions is given by the constraints
imposed by the available data. Admittedly, the identification of interactions in
social networks beyond the traditional pairwise relationships constitutes nowa-
days an important challenge. Interestingly enough, this also represents an op-
portunity from an experimental point of view. It is also worth mentioning that
the application of our results to scientific publications is based on the hypothesis
that the interaction structure is the outcome of an optimization process, where
the average distribution of groups that each node is part of coincides with the


                                        16
synergy factor, such that the system is in a stationary state of the dynamics
of the PGG. This hypothesis, which constitutes a limitation of our method to
extract synergy factors from real data, could potentially be either validated or
refuted by models considering the dynamics within the topology of interactions
on top of the PGG. Moreover, the PGG imposes all cooperators to contribute
with the same amount, making this contribution a boolean variable in practice.
And therefore, an additional limitation arises when adapting real systems to the
rigid formalization of the PGG, as the role of cooperators and defectors cannot
be unequivocally defined when the contributions are not only 0 or 1.
    It is also worth mentioning that in his essay titled Innate Social Aptitudes
of Man, W. D. Hamilton wrote, “There may be reasons to be glad that human
life is a many-person game and not just a disjointed collection of two-person
games”. He was referring to the fact that social enforcement works better in
groups with more than two members, which can offer at least a partial cure
for the problems with reciprocation in larger groups [38]. We note that the
theoretical framework of higher-order interactions also invites to re-examine
other fundamental mechanisms that may promote cooperation, such as image
scoring [39, 40, 41], rewarding [61], and punishment [62, 63, 64, 65].
    Given the fundamental differences between pairwise and higher-order in-
teractions, it would also be of interest to revisit the role of specific network
properties and their role in the evolution of cooperation. In this regard, the
role of community structure [21], as well as two or more network layers [22, 23,
24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29], promise to be fruitful ground for future explorations on
how interaction structure impacts cooperation. Overall, we believe that the in-
troduction of higher-order interactions to evolutionary games has the potential
to improve our understanding of the evolution of cooperation and other social
processes in networks.


Methods
Uniform random hypergraphs (URH): We detail here the procedure we
have adopted to sample g-uniform hypergraphs, i.e. hypergraphs with all hy-
perlinks of the same order g. A URH of order g can be constructed by assigning
a uniform probability p to each g-tuple of N . For each of them, a random num-
ber in the [0, 1) interval is generated, and if this number is lower than p, the
hyperlink containing the g-tuple is created. However, this method scales badly
with g since the number     of g-tuples to be considered is equal to the binomial
coefficient CgN = Ng , which grows fast as a function of g. A more efficient
                       

procedure is to fix the total number of hyperlinks, L, and generate a random
integer in the [1, CgN ] interval. One has to provide an ordering for the set of
all possible hyperlinks, so that each of the random integers corresponds to a
hyperlink. The hyperlinks selected through this process are then added to the
hypergraph. The hyperlink ordering is based on the following combinatorial




                                       17
identity
                                       N −(g−1)
                                         X
                                                   N −i
                               CgN =              Cg−1
                                         i=1
that allows us to partition set L of all the possible hyperlinks of a g-uniform hy-
pergraph in terms of disjoint hypergraphs, each one of them containing the
hyperlinks that form the corresponding g-star hypergraph [66]. This holds
true in general, which enables us to apply the same argument recursively,
such that we can order all the possible hyperlinks univocally, and even more,
the probability for having a specific node in a hyperlink is equal for all the
                                                                              C N −i
nodes. These properties arise from the combinatorial probabilities di = Cg−1      N
                                                                                 g
for i = 1, . . . N − (g − 1) i.e. the normalised weights of each of the terms in the
summation. We have empirically
                          Pi           found a distribution that can be used as an
approximation to ci = j=1 dj , the cumulative distribution of di , namely given
by 1 − (1 − x)g , where x = i/(N − (g − 1)). See Figure 7 for a numerical proof
of the convergence between both expressions.
    For the purpose of studying the stationary condition of a game, we are
interested in having a connected hypergraph. The critical thresholds for the
number of hyperlinks, Lc , and the hyperdegree, kc , are equal to Lc = Ng ln N
and kc = ln N . Hence, when L is larger than Lc , there is a high probability that
the resultant hypergraph is connected.

Power random hypergraphs (PRH): We have seen that using the combi-
natorial probabilities di allows us to create uniform random hypergraphs. There-
fore, increasing the value of the exponent g to g 0 in ci , such that g 0 > g, will
increase the probability of sampling the hyperlinks belonging to the g-star hy-
pergraphs of low index nodes, and therefore introduce heterogeneities in the
degree distribution. The control parameter that we use in the simulations in
the manuscript is µ ∈ [0, 1]. In terms of µ, one can obtain the power to use in
the cumulative distribution g 0 as g 0 = (1 + µ)g. In order to sample hyperlinks
of order g according to the new distribution, we transform the random number
r to a different random r0
                                                          di (0)
                        r0 = ci−1 (0) + [r − ci−1 (µ)]                          (4)
                                                          di (µ)
Here i is the g-star to which the hyperlink would belong if it was sampled
according to r. In this expression di (µ) and ci (µ) account for the distributions
using the value of g 0 as a function of µ. Accordingly, di (0) and ci (0) are simply
the distributions of the uniform case. See Figure 8 for the analysis of degree
distribution emerging from the PRH.

Scale-free random hypergraphs (SRH): The standard indicator of het-
erogeneity in graphs is the power-law decay of the degree distribution. Here we
employ the static scale-free algorithm [67] to generate such a profile. We use
the same control parameter as in the PRH, µ ∈ [0, 1], which in this case results


                                         18
in a power-law pk ∼ k −λ where the power λ is λ = 1 + 1/µ. See Figure ?? for
the degree distribution of the hypergraphs generated with the SRH.

Extracting synergy factors from real data: We show here how the depen-
dence of the reduced synergy factor r(g) on group size g can be derived for real
systems, based on the assumption that this information is encoded in the very
same structure of a hypergraph. In particular, we have considered a data set
of scientific publications and we have used it to investigate how benefits change
with the size of groups in scientific collaborations. The data set consists of
577886 papers published in the period from 1904 to 2015 in the collection of all
the journals of the American Physical Society (APS) [68]. We have constructed
the 13 hypergraphs corresponding to different journals, such as Physical Review,
Physical Review Letters, etc. of the APS. The nodes and hyperlinks of these
hypergraphs represent scientists and publications respectively. The order of a
hyperlink is equal to the number of authors of the corresponding publication.
For each hypergraph, we have extracted the number Lg of hyperlinks of a given
order g, which we used to compute the average number k g = gLg /N of hyper-
links of order g a node is involved in. The reduced synergy factor r(g) can then
be extracted from the proportion pg = k g /k of hyperlinks of order g of a node,
by assuming that r(g) = zpg and using the critical point relation:
                                  +
                              g=g
                               X
                                      pg (1 − r(g)) = 0                       (5)
                              g=g −

to calculate the proportionality constant z.

Cost-benefit factorisation of the synergy factor: In scientific collabora-
tions across all journals of the APS, an optimal team size is associated with a
maximum in the synergy factor, suggesting that an excessively large number
of co-authors might lead to disadvantages in cooperation. In order to account
for these effects, we have modelled the synergy factor extracted from real-world
collaboration data as the following function of g:

                          f (g, α, β, γ) = αg β e−γ(g−1) .                    (6)

ruled by the three parameters, α, β and γ. The first parameter, α, introduced
in Eq. (1), is determined by the critical point condition. The remaining two
parameters account respectively for the benefits and costs of the higher-order
interactions. Benefits are modelled as a power-law of the group size g with an
exponent β. Costs are described by an exponential decrease in the group size
tuned by the cost parameter γ. Different functions of g might also provide a
satisfactory fit of the data. Here we have opted for this expression because it
enables to factorize the group size dependence into two different contributions,
benefits and costs, that can be interpreted in terms of behaviors of the players.
The benefits grow as g β , where β captures the synergistic effect of group inter-
actions. The term due to the cost associated to task organization in groups has


                                          19
its maximum at g = 1, and the exponential dependence has been adopted to
avoid possible singularities of other functional forms at g = 1. In conclusion,
Eq. (6) has a maximum at g = β/γ, which summarizes the result in a com-
pressed expression. To extract the pair of parameters (β, γ) for each journal,
we have explored the parameter space and performed an optimisation in order
to reproduce the empirical points correctly. For each considered pair (β, γ),
we have computed the normalised distance between the synergy factor inferred
analytically and the one associated to the data (see Equation (13) for further
details on the procedure). The pairs with the smallest distance are selected as
the outcome of the optimisation process and are those reported in Fig. 5c.
Acknowledgements
U.A.-R. acknowledges support from the Spanish Government through Maria de
Maeztu excellence accreditation 2018-2022 (Ref. MDM-2017-0714) and from
the Basque Government through the Postdoctoral Program (Ref. POS-2017-1-
0022). F.B. acknowledges partial support from the ERC Synergy Grant 810115
(DYNASNET). V. L. acknowledges support from the Leverhulme Trust Re-
search Fellowship “CREATE: the network components of creativity and suc-
cess”. Y. M. acknowledges partial support from the Government of Aragón
and FEDER funds, Spain through grant E36-20R to FENOL, by MINECO and
FEDER funds (grant FIS2017-87519-P) and from Intesa Sanpaolo Innovation
Center. M. P. was supported by the Slovenian Research Agency (Grant Nos.
J1-2457, J1-9112, and P1-0403). G. F. A. acknowledges support from Intesa
Sanpaolo Innovation Center. We thank M. Clarin from COSNET Lab for help
and assistance with the figures. The funders had no role in study design, data
collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

Author contributions
U. A.-R, F. B. and V. L. conceived the study with contributions from G. F. A,
M. P and Y. M. U. A.-R performed the calculations, U. A.-R, F. B., G. F. A,
M. P, Y. M. and V. L. analysed the data and discussed the results. U. A.-R, F.
B., G. F. A, M. P, Y. M. and V. L. wrote the paper.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Data availability
The APS dataset is provided by the APS at their website: https://journals.aps.org/datasets.

Code availability
Custom code that supports the findings of this study is available from the cor-
responding author upon request.




                                      20
References
 [1] Nowak, M. A. and Highfield, R. SuperCooperators: Altruism, Evolution,
     and Why We Need Each Other to Succeed. Free Press, New York, (2011).
 [2] Santos, F. C., Rodrigues, J. F., and Pacheco, J. M. Graph topology plays
     a determinant role in the evolution of cooperation. Proc. R. Soc. B 273,
     51–55 (2006).

 [3] Rand, D. G., Arbesman, S., and Christakis, N. A. Dynamic social networks
     promote cooperation in experiments with humans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
     USA 108, 19193–19198 (2011).
 [4] Hrdy, S. B. Mothers and Others: The Evolutionary Origins of Mutual
     Understanding. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, (2011).

 [5] Henrich, J., Boyd, R., Bowles, S., Camerer, C., Fehr, E., Gintis, H., and
     McElreath, R. In search of homo economicus: Behavioral experiments in
     15 small-scale societies. Am. Econ. Rev. 91, 73–78 (2001).
 [6] Nowak, M. A. Five rules for the evolution of cooperation. Science 314,
     1560–1563 (2006).
 [7] Henrich, N. and Henrich, J. P. Why humans cooperate: A cultural and
     evolutionary explanation. Oxford University Press, Oxford, U.K., (2007).
 [8] Rand, D. G. and Nowak, M. A. Human cooperation. Trends in Cognitive
     Sciences 17, 413–425 (2013).

 [9] Kraft-Todd, G., Yoeli, E., Bhanot, S., and Rand, D. Promoting cooperation
     in the field. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 3, 96–101 (2015).
[10] Perc, M., Jordan, J. J., Rand, D. G., Wang, Z., Boccaletti, S., and Szolnoki,
     A. Statistical physics of human cooperation. Phys. Rep. 687, 1–51 (2017).

[11] Jackson, M. O. and Zenou, Y. Economic Analyses of Social Networks.
     Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, (2013).
[12] Weibull, J. W. Evolutionary Game Theory. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
     (1995).

[13] Hofbauer, J. and Sigmund, K. Evolutionary Games and Population Dy-
     namics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., (1998).
[14] Nowak, M. A. Evolutionary Dynamics. Harvard University Press, Cam-
     bridge, MA, (2006).
[15] Axelrod, R. The Evolution of Cooperation. Basic Books, New York, (1984).

[16] Nowak, M. A. and May, R. M. Evolutionary games and spatial chaos.
     Nature 359, 826–829 (1992).


                                       21
[17] Santos, F. C. and Pacheco, J. M. Scale-free networks provide a unifying
     framework for the emergence of cooperation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 098104
     (2005).
[18] Santos, F. C., Pacheco, J. M., and Lenaerts, T. Evolutionary dynamics of
     social dilemmas in structured heterogeneous populations. Proc. Natl. Acad.
     Sci. USA 103, 3490–3494 (2006).
[19] Gómez-Gardeñes, J., Campillo, M., Florı́a, L. M., and Moreno, Y. Dynam-
     ical organization of cooperation in complex networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 98,
     108103 (2007).

[20] Tarnita, C. E., Antal, T., Ohtsuki, H., and Nowak, M. A. Evolutionary
     dynamics in set structured populations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106,
     8601–8604 (2009).
[21] Fotouhi, B., Momeni, N., Allen, B., and Nowak, M. A. Evolution of coop-
     eration on large networks with community structure. J. R. Soc. Interface
     16, 20180677 (2019).
[22] Wang, Z., Szolnoki, A., and Perc, M. Evolution of public cooperation on
     interdependent networks: The impact of biased utility functions. EPL 97,
     48001 (2012).
[23] Gómez-Gardeñes, J., Reinares, I., Arenas, A., and Florı́a, L. M. Evolution
     of cooperation in multiplex networks. Sci. Rep. 2, 620 (2012).
[24] Gómez-Gardeñes, J., Gracia-Lázaro, C., Florı́a, L. M., and Moreno, Y.
     Evolutionary dynamics on interdependent populations. Phys. Rev. E 86,
     056113 (2012).

[25] Wang, Z., Szolnoki, A., and Perc, M. Interdependent network reciprocity
     in evolutionary games. Sci. Rep. 3, 1183 (2013).
[26] Wang, Z., Wang, L., and Perc, M. Degree mixing in multilayer networks
     impedes the evolution of cooperation. Phys. Rev. E 89, 052813 (2014).
[27] Battiston, F., Perc, M., and Latora, V. Determinants of public cooperation
     in multiplex networks. New J. Phys. 19, 073017 (2017).
[28] Fu, F. and Chen, X. Leveraging statistical physics to improve understand-
     ing of cooperation in multiplex networks. New J. Phys. 19, 071002 (2017).
[29] Fotouhi, B., Momeni, N., Allen, B., and Nowak, M. A. Conjoining unco-
     operative societies facilitates evolution of cooperation. Nat. Human Behav.
     2, 492 (2018).
[30] Lieberman, E., Hauert, C., and Nowak, M. A. Evolutionary dynamics on
     graphs. Nature 433, 312–316 (2005).



                                       22
[31] Ohtsuki, H., Hauert, C., Lieberman, E., and Nowak, M. A. A simple rule
     for the evolution of cooperation on graphs and social networks. Nature
     441, 502–505 (2006).
[32] Allen, B., Lippner, G., Chen, Y.-T., Fotouhi, B., Nowak, M. A., and Yau,
     S.-T. Evolutionary dynamics on any population structure. Nature 544,
     227–230 (2017).
[33] Archetti, M. and Scheuring, I. Review: Game theory of public goods in
     one-shot social dilemmas without assortment. J. Theor. Biol. 299, 9–20
     (2012).

[34] Perc, M., Gómez-Gardeñes, J., Szolnoki, A., and Florı́a and Y. Moreno,
     L. M. Evolutionary dynamics of group interactions on structured popula-
     tions: a review. J. R. Soc. Interface 10, 20120997 (2013).
[35] Santos, F. C., Santos, M. D., and Pacheco, J. M. Social diversity promotes
     the emergence of cooperation in public goods games. Nature 454, 213–216
     (2008).
[36] Szolnoki, A., Perc, M., and Szabó, G. Topology-independent impact of
     noise on cooperation in spatial public goods games. Phys. Rev. E 80,
     056109 (2009).
[37] Trivers, R. L. The evolution of reciprocal altruism. Q. Rev. Biol. 46, 35–57
     (1971).
[38] Sigmund, K. Punish or perish? retailation and collaboration among hu-
     mans. Trends Ecol. Evol. 22, 593–600 (2007).
[39] Nowak, M. A. and Sigmund, K. Evolution of indirect reciprocity by image
     scoring. Nature 393, 573–577 (1998).
[40] Milinski, M., Semmann, D., Bakker, T. C. M., and Krambeck, H.-J. Coop-
     eration through indirect reciprocity: image scoring or standing strategy?
     Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 268, 2495–2501 (2001).
[41] Nax, H. H., Perc, M., Szolnoki, A., and Helbing, D. Stability of cooperation
     under image scoring in group interactions. Sci. Rep. 5, 12145 (2015).
[42] Fehr, E. Don’t lose your reputation. Nature 432, 449–450 (2004).
[43] Gächter, S. Reputation and reciprocity: Consequences for the labour rela-
     tion. Scand. J. Econ. 104, 1–26 (2002).

[44] Fu, F., Hauert, C., Nowak, M. A., and Wang, L. Reputation-based partner
     choice promotes cooperation in social networks. Phys. Rev. E 78, 026117
     (2008).




                                       23
[45] Latora, V., Nicosia, V., and Russo, G. Complex networks: Principles,
     methods and applications. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.,
     (2017).
[46] Berge, C. Hypergraphs: Combinatorics of finite sets. Elsevier, Amsterdam,
     (1984).

[47] Battiston, F., Cencetti, G., Iacopini, I., Latora, V., Lucas, M., Patania,
     A., Young, J.-G., and Petri, G. Networks beyond pairwise interactions:
     structure and dynamics. Phys. Rep. 874, 1–92 (2020).
[48] Gómez-Gardeñes, J., Romance, M., Criado, R., Vilone, D., and Sánchez,
     A. Evolutionary games defined at the network mesoscale: The public goods
     game. Chaos 21, 016113 (2011).
[49] Gómez-Gardeñes, J., Vilone, D., and Sánchez, A. Disentangling social and
     group heterogeneities: Public goods games on complex networks. EPL 95,
     68003 (2011).

[50] Peña, J. and Rochat, Y. Bipartite graphs as models of population structures
     in evolutionary multiplayer games. PLoS ONE 7, e44514 (2012).
[51] Wu, J. and Zusai, D. A potential game approach to modelling evolution in
     a connected society. Nat. Hum. Behav. 3, 604–610 (2019).

[52] Taylor, P. and Jonker, L. Evolutionary stable strategies and game dynam-
     ics. Math. Biosci. 40, 145–156 (1978).
[53] Wu, L., Wang, D., and Evans, J. A. Large teams develop and small teams
     disrupt science and technology. Nature 566(7744), 378–382 (2019).
[54] Wuchty, S., Jones, B. F., and Uzzi, B. The increasing dominance of teams
     in production of knowledge. Science 316, 1036–1039 (2007).
[55] Klug, M. and Bagrow, J. P. Understanding the group dynamics and success
     of teams. R. Soc. Open Sci. 3, 160007 (2016).
[56] Bettencourt, L. M. A., Lobo, J., Helbing, D., Kühnert, C., and West, G. B.
     Growth, innovation, scaling, and the pace of life in cities. Proc. Natl. Acad.
     Sci. USA 104, 7301–7306 (2007).
[57] Bettencourt, L. M. A. The origins of scaling in cities. Science 340, 1438
     (2013).
[58] Battiston, F., Musciotto, F., Wang, D., Barabási, A.-L., Szell, M., and
     Sinatra, R. Taking census of physics. Nat. Rev. Phys. 1, 89–97 (2019).
[59] Milojević, S. Principles of scientific research team formation and evolution.
     Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111, 3984–3989 (2014).



                                        24
[60] Wang, Z., Wang, L., Szolnoki, A., and Perc, M. Evolutionary games on
     multilayer networks: a colloquium. Eur. Phys. J. B 88, 124 (2015).
[61] Rand, D. G., Dreber, A., Ellingsen, T., Fudenberg, D., and Nowak, M. A.
     Positive interactions promote public cooperation. Science 325, 1272–1275
     (2009).

[62] Andreoni, J., Harbaugh, W., and Vesterlund, L. The carrot or the stick:
     Rewards, punishments, and cooperation. Am. Econ. Rev. 93, 893–902
     (2003).
[63] Gächter, S., Renner, E., and Sefton, M. The long-run benefits of punish-
     ment. Science 322, 1510 (2008).
[64] Boyd, R., Gintis, H., and Bowles, S. Coordinated punishment of defectors
     sustains cooperation and can proliferate when rare. Science 328, 617–620
     (2010).
[65] Jordan, J. J., Hoffman, M., Bloom, P., and Rand, D. G. Third-party
     punishment as a costly signal of trustworthiness. Nature 530, 473–476
     (2016).
[66] E.Eliad-Badt. Decomposition of the complete hypergraph into stars. Dis-
     crete Math. 71, 107–117 (1988).

[67] B. Jhun, M. J. and Kahng, B. Simplicial SIS model in scale-free uniform
     hypergraph. J. Stat. Mech. , 123207 (2019).
[68] APS Dataset https://journals.aps.org/datasets.




                                     25
Appendix
Game Implementations
Graph Implementation In the original graph implementation, or GI, the
core idea is to derive the higher-order structure from the network of players. In
the GI every node constructs its own focal hyperlink, whose constituents are the
node itself and its first neighbours. Therefore, for a system of N players the GI
imposes N different groups, each of them of g = ki2 + 1 members. A micro-step
in the game is played by following a sequence of steps: Firstly a node, and one
of its neighbours, say ni and nj , are randomly selected from N . Secondly, the
nodes play a round of the game for all the groups they belong to, accumulate
their payoffs, πi and πj , and normalize them with the number of games they
have played. As there is a group for each player every node will play ki2 + 1
rounds. The third step is the update of the strategy, and for that purpose we
employ the replicator update rule. According to this, ni will adopt the strategy
                          1
of nj with probability ∆    (πj − πi )θ(πj − πi ), where ∆ is the absolute value of
the maximal payoff difference for all the possible strategies. It is noteworthy to
mention that the replicator update rule is not the only update mechanism, but
it is the one that we have selected because it provides an effective and noisy
payoff oriented update rule by means of a simple analytic expression.

Bipartite Implementation The Bipartite Implementation (BI) lies at an
intermediate point between the GI and the HI. On the one hand, and like in the
HI and unlike in the GI, each round of BI occurs in a hyperlink of a hypergraph,
which makes the implementation consistent with the structure of higher-order
interactions present in the system. On the other hand, the update process does
not benefit from the simultaneous interaction with multiple players, as each
node updates its strategy by comparing its payoff with a randomly selected
neighbour. The algorithm would be as follows: at each step of the game a node,
one of its hyperlinks and a neighbour belonging to this hyperlink are randomly
selected. Both nodes play a round of the game for each hyperlink they are part
of. The original node updates its strategy by comparing its payoff with the one
of its randomly selected neighbour.

    We have carried out a series of numerical simulations in an ensemble of
hypergraphs with 1000 nodes for different values of the group size G, see Figure
6. We first observe that the critical point is the same as in the HI, meaning that
the asymptotic emergence of the defectors or cooperators is the same in both
cases. However we do observe a difference in the relaxation time: even if HI and
BI are comparable, proving the robustness of the procedure, BI is slower, and
it exceeds the limit established by the replicator approach.




                                        26
                   (a)                                      (b)

Figure 6: Public Goods Game in the Bipartite Implementation. (a) We depict
the fraction of cooperators as a function of the synergy factor for a system with
N = 1000 nodes, and L = LC hyperlinks evolving during T = 104 time steps.
(b) We show the relaxation time of the system as a function of the synergy
factor for a hypergraph with N = 1000 nodes and L = 5LC hyperlinks.


Uniform Random Hypergraphs
Creation Algorithm
We provide here an example of the hyperlink counting process. Let us suppose
that we have a system with N = 5 and g = 3, meaning that we could create a
hypergraph of a potential number of C35 = 10 hyperlinks, given by
              L = {123, 124, 125, 134, 135, 145, 234, 235, 245, 345}
                                                                N
The mechanism to a assign a random natural number in [1, CG       ] to each hyper-
link is to make use of the star decomposition. Following with our example, we
have C35 = C24 + C23 + C22 , which enables us to make a first partition on the g-
star hypergraphs: {123, 124, 125, 134, 135, 145}, {234, 235, 245} and {345}. We
can recursively apply our procedure, and make another partition in the sub-
graphs that we have here, for instance {123, 124, 125}, {134, 135} and {145}
conform the first set of the previous step. These lists of combinatorial numbers
may be approximated with a continuous function for better handling them. As
discussed in the methods section, we propose to use ci ∼ 1 − (1 − x)g as an
approximation for the cumulative probability, which gives di ∝ g(1 − x)g−1 for
the ordinary probability. In Figure 7 we show the convergence between the
continuous approximation and the real discrete function. These formulas are
crucial for carrying out the PRH algorithm.

Replicator Dynamics for URH
Let us introduce now the replicator model for predicting the dynamics of the
system. This technique is based on the indistinguishability between different


                                       27
                   (a)                                        (b)

Figure 7: Combinatorial Approximation. The coloured lines show (a) the prob-
ability, and (b) the cummulative probability of the combinatorial summatory.
The shaded area corresponds to the continuous approximation. The variable x
is the continuous equivalent of the discrete i which allows us to associate each
term in the summatory to a rational number in [0, 1].


nodes, and therefore it should describe the system as long as the hypergraph is
connected and the hyperlinks are uniformly distributed among the nodes. We
are working with URH, and therefore the more connected the system is, the
better it fulfils the uniform requirement, and the closer it gets to the replicator
description.
    In this simplified analysis we will describe the system in terms the fraction
of defectors xD and the fraction of cooperators xC . We compute the average
normalized payoff of defectors and cooperators πD and πC , as a function of their
fractions, xD and xC , in a hyperlink of order g. In order to do so, we sum the
payoff of all the possible configurations of g − 1 nodes. The sum is taken over
g − 1 because one of the nodes is already occupied by a defector, in πD , or a
cooperator in πC . The payoff is calculated with the reduced synergy factor r.
                             g−1      
                             X     g−1
                πD       =                 xg−1−i
                                            D     xiC ir
                                   i
                             i=0
                             g−1      
                             X     g−1
                πC       =                 xg−1−i
                                            D     xiC ((i + 1)r − 1)           (7)
                                   i
                             i=0

The total average payoffs, are obtained by multiplying the ones of Equation (7)
with the average hyperdegree. But, we also normalize the total payoff with the
hyperdegree, so the terms that go into the dynamical equation are indeed πD
and πC . One can observe that the expression for πD − πC does not contain an




                                        28
explicit dependence on g, and therefore the same formula is valid for any order.
                          g−1      
                          X     g−1         g−1−i i
          πD − πC     =                    xD    xC [ir − ((i + 1)r − 1)]
                                     i
                          i=0
                                    g−1      
                                    X     g−1
                      =   (1 − r)                  xg−1−i
                                                    D     xiC
                                               i
                                    i=0
                      =   (1 − r)(xD + xC )g−1 = 1 − r                         (8)

   We now compute ∆, the maximal payoff difference to be used in the repli-
cators update rule. The π + and π − indicate the maximal and minimal payoff
values from all the possible configuration of strategies.
                                   −            −          −
                         +              +            +
                           πD − πC   if πD − πC   > πC  − πD
                   ∆≡       +      −     +      −     +    −
                           πC − πD if πD − πC < πC − πD

∆ is only expressed for comparisons of payoffs of different strategies, since the
strategies are copied from the neighbours, and therefore the terms πi+ − πi− ,
where two nodes share the same strategy, are irrelevant. For any order g, ∆ is
given by                     
                               r(g − 2) + 1 if r < 1
                         ∆=                                                   (9)
                               gr − 1 if r > 1
We now work with Q, the normalized payoff difference, Q ≡ (πD − πC )/∆.
    The system equation is derived as the sum of all the channels via which the
strategy of a node can change. These channels correspond to the different con-
figurations of strategies of hyperlinks of order g, weighted with the probabilities
of the nodes having a particular strategy. For each configuration, one has to
compute the probability of having a defector-cooperator pair, wD wC /g(g − 1)
and the probability that this pair results in a strategy change. Notice that the
values of wD and wC , the number of defectors and cooperators in the group, are
precisely the exponents of xC and xD . We employ the replicator update, which
in this context means that the flip probability is computed as −Qθ(πC − πD )
when a defector changes into a cooperator and as Qθ(πD − πC ) in the opposite
case. This sign corresponds to the calculation of the fraction of defectors, the
contrary holds true for the fraction of cooperators.




                                          29
             G−2
             X             
                      g          g−1−i 1+i   (g − 1 − i)(1 + i) h                               i
∂ t xD   =                      xD    xC                          − − Qθ(πC − πD ) + Qθ(πD − πC )
                     1+i                         g(g − 1)
             i=0
             G−2
             X             
                      g          g−1−i 1+i   Q(g − 1 − i)(1 + i)
         =                      xD    xC
                     1+i                          g(g − 1)
             i=0
             G−2
             X                        g!(g − 1 − i)(1 + i)
         =         Qxg−1−i
                     D     x1+i
                            C
             i=0
                                  (g − 1 − i)!(1 + i)!g(g − 1)
             G−2
             X             (g − 2)!
         =         Qxg−1−i
                     D     x1+i
                            C
           i=0
                        (g − 2 − i)!i!
                  G−2
                  X  g − 2  g−2−i
         = QxD xC             xD       xiC = QxD xC (xD + xC )g−2 = QxD xC
                        i
                      i=0

    This is precisely the replicator equation which provides a very useful tool for
describing the system since its structure does not explicitly depend on g, even
if the evolution itself does, since Q is a function of g.
                                  ∂t xD   =    QxD xC
                                  ∂t xC   =    −QxD xC                         (10)
    The stationary condition yields three possible outcomes, xD = 0, xC = 0
and Q = 0. The first two are the trivial phases of the system, and the third one
denotes the critical point, that corresponds to r = 1. Notice that this condition
is reduced to finding the zeros of Equation (8), and is therefore common for all
systems, and independent of their order. This implies that for random uniform
hypergraphs cooperators only emerge when R > g.
    If the initial condition is given by a uniform distribution of strategies, xD =
xC = 0.5, the time evolution reads
                                                1
                                xD (t) =
                                             1 + eQt
                                                 1
                                 xC (t) =
                                             1 + e−Qt
Even if the relaxation time is infinite, we can get the time to arrive the neigh-
bourhood of the asymptotic state by imposing the condition xi = 1/N or
xi = (N − 1)/N that yield
                                        ln(N − 1)
                                    T =                                         (11)
                                            |Q|

Hyperdegree-Heterogeneous Random Hypergraphs
PRH and SRH
In this subsection we report a statistical analysis about the average hyperdegree
distribution obtained when creating the hypergraph using the PRH and SRH


                                              30
algorithms explained in the Methods section of the main text. We supply nu-
merical evidence about the nature of the PRH and SRH, see Figure 8. For the
former the hyperdegree distribution has two clear phases, sharp decay and an
intermediate flatter regime. This combination enables the existence of hubs with
a maximum hyperdegree of 1.5 orders of magnitude larger than in the uniform
case. For the latter the hyperdegree distribution follows a power law, visualized
as a straight line in the log-log scale. The hubs created using the SRH have a
hyperdegree 3 orders of magnitude larger than those in the uniform case.




         (a)                  (b)                  (c)                  (d)




         (e)                  (f)                  (g)                  (h)

Figure 8: Hyperdegree-Heterogeneous Distributions. We show the value of pk
the probability of having hyperdegree k as a function of the value of the hyper-
degree k in a logarithmic scale. In the first and second row we plot the results
for Power Random Hypergraphs and Scale-Free Random Hypergraphs respec-
tively. Each of the columns is associated to g = 2, 3, 4, 5. In each of the subplots
we plot the distributions obtained for µ = 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1. The simulations
have been performed over ensembles of Hypergraphs with N = 1000 nodes and
L = Lc hyperlinks.


Replicator Dynamics for Hyperdegree-Heterogeneous Hypergraphs
In this subsection we provide theoretical arguments that clarify the results of
the numerical simulations. More precisely, we are looking for the conditions
that allow hypergraphs with a heterogeneous hyperdegree distribution to behave
according to the dynamics derived for the uniform case. In order to do so, we
are going to repeat all the steps in the formalization of the mean-field dynamics
introducing an explicit dependence on the hyperdegree, such that the fraction of
defectors and cooperators are expressed in terms of the corresponding fractions




                                        31
conditioned to the nodes hyperdegree
                               X
                          xD =     p(k)p(D|k)
                                      k∈K
                                      X
                              xC =          p(k)p(C|k)                                              (12)
                                      k∈K

Here K denotes the set of all possible hyperdegrees and k an element of that set.

    We first notice that the value of ∆ is the same as in the uniform case, as ∆
is a function of the maximal and minimal possible payoffs, which are the same.
We continue with the proposal of the dynamical equation. The time evolution
of Equation (12) can be expressed as a sum of each of the p(D|k) terms, that
for clarity we relabel as xDk . There are two possible transitions in which the
fraction of defectors with hyperdegree k, xDk can change: a cooperator with
hyperdegree k changes into a defector of hyperhyperdegree k, and a defector
of hyperdegree k changes into a cooperator of hyperdegree k. The dynamics
accounts for these two contributions as follows:
  d                   X                              X                           X
     xDk   = −xDk             p(k 0 |k)p(C|k 0 )               p(k 00 |kk 0 )             p(x|k 00 ) ×
  dt
                      k0 ∈K                        k00 ∈KG−2                    x∈X G−2
               (πCk0 − πDk )θ(πCk0 − πDk )
                     X ∆                    X                                    X
               +xCk      p(k 0 |k)p(D|k 0 )                    p(k 00 |kk 0 )             p(x|k 00 ) ×
                      k0 ∈K                        k00 ∈KG−2                    x∈X G−2
                (πDk0 − πCk )θ(πDk0 − πCk )
                             ∆


The variable and first summatory in both terms account for the probability
of having the defector and cooperator pair that will take part in the strategy
update. In order to ensure that both are in the same hyperlink we introduce
the hyperdegree-hyperdegree correlation to account for the probability that the
hyperdegree of the player inspiring the strategy update is k 0 , given that the
player changing is strategy has hyperdegree k. The next term corresponds to
the remaining g−2 nodes of the hyperlink, and thus, k 00 represents G−2 elements
of K. Again the hyperdegree-hyperdegree correlation provides the information
about the conditional probability of having g − 2 nodes with hyperdegrees k 00
given that the remaining two nodes have hyperdegrees k and k 0 . In the next
term, the summation in x, x accounts for G − 2 elements of X , where X is
the set of all the possible strategies, either D or C. The last term contains the
comparison of the payoffs, that will eather increase or decrease the amount of
defectors. Following the same strategy as in the uniform case, we will have a
closer look at the payoff comparison. The ∆ contribution is solved already, so




                                             32
we focus on the numerator.
                      X                                X
          πDk =            p(k 00 |k)                          p(x00 |k 00 )(nr)
                         k00 ∈KG−1                x00 ∈X G−1
                            X                           X
            πCk0     =               p(k 00 |k 0 )                p(x00 |k 00 )((n + 1)r − 1)
                         k00 ∈KG−1                   x00 ∈X G−1

Here n is the number of cooperators of each particular case of the summatory,
which is of course a function of x00 .

    The important terms are p(k 00 |k) and p(k 00 |k 0 ), those that account for the
hyperdegree-hyperdegree distribution, i.e., the probability that a node with a
given hyperdegree k or k 0 is part of a hyperlink with nodes of hyperdegrees given
by k 00 . For hypergraphs in which the neighbouring hyperdegree distribution
p(k 00 |k) is given by the total hyperdegree distribution p(k 00 ), this expression can
be reduced to
                             X              X
                πDk =              p(k 00 )      p(x00 |k 00 )(nr)
                          k00 ∈KG−1               x00 ∈X G−1
                             X                        X
              πCk0   =                 p(k 00 )                p(x00 |k 00 )((n + 1)r − 1)
                          k00 ∈KG−1               x00 ∈X G−1

and then
                            X                        X
    πDk − πCk0       =               p(k 00 )                p(x00 |k 00 )((nr) − ((n + 1)r − 1))
                         k00 ∈KG−1              x00 ∈X G−1
                            X                        X
                                           00
                     =               p(k )                   p(x00 |k 00 )(1 − r)
                         k00 ∈KG−1              x00 ∈X G−1
                     =   (1 − r)
This is indeed the same result as in the uniform case, Q = 1−r         ∆ , an expression
that we can now use in the main derivation to simplify the equation
 d                               X                            X                      X
   xDk = −xDk (−Qθ(r − 1))             p(k 0 |k)p(C|k 0 )           p(k 00 |kk 0 )         p(x|k 00 )
dt
                                k0 ∈K                     k00 ∈KG−2                x∈X G−2
                            X                           X                       X
                                      0           0                 00    0
             +xCk Qθ(1 − r)      p(k |k)p(D|k )                 p(k |kk )              p(x|k 00 )
                                   k0 ∈K                           k00 ∈KG−2             x∈X G−2
          =    Qθ(r − 1)xDk xC + Qθ(1 − r)xCk xD
In the second step we have make use of the assumption that there are not
hyperdegree-hyperdegree correlations, p(k 0 |k) = p(k 0 ). We then insert this equa-
tion into Equation (12) which yields
            d
              xD = Qθ(r − 1)xD xC + Qθ(1 − r)xC xD = QxD xC
           dt
The dynamics is equivalent to the one derived in the uniform case. The inter-
pretation is the following: when the nodes are indistinguishable in the sense
that their neighbourhoods are equivalent the mean-field dynamics is still valid
even if the hypergraphs are heterogeneous.


                                                     33
Order-Heterogeneous Random Hypergraphs
Replicator Dynamics for Order-Heterogeneous Hypergraphs
The first thing to notice is that the average payoff difference, is nothing but the
sum of the average payoff differences for each of the orders, weighted with the
pg . The sum goes from g − , the minimal value of g to g + , the maximal one.
                                        g+
                                        X
                           πD − πC =          pg (1 − rg )
                                       g=g−


   We first derive the normalization factor ∆, from Equation (9), via the explicit
expression for the reduced synergy factor rg = αg β−1 . We consider α, β ≥ 0.
The extreme point of rg at β = 1 divides the analysis in two different intervals,
β < 1 and β ≥ 1.
   In the first one, β < 1, the maximal payoffs π + are obtained for the lowest
order g− , and the minimal payoffs π − for the highest order g+ .
       +     β−1                 −       +     β       −     β−1
      πD = αg−   (g− − 1),      πD = 0, πC = αg− − 1, πC = αg+   −1

   Therefore, we get

                     
                         β−1              β−1                      2
                      αg−   (g− − 1) − αg+   + 1 if α ≤       β−1
                                                              g−     β−1
                                                                   +g+
        ∆(β < 1) =       β                     2
                      αg− − 1 if α >      β−1
                                          g−     β−1
                                               +g+


  In the second interval, β ≥ 1, the maximal payoffs are obtained for the
maximal orders, and the minimal payoffs for the minimal orders.
       +     β−1                 −       +     β       −     β−1
      πD = αg+   (g+ − 1),      πD = 0, πC = αg+ − 1, πC = αg−   −1

   which yields,

                     
                         β−1              β−1                      2
                      αg+   (g+ − 1) − αg−   + 1 if α ≤       β−1
                                                              g−     β−1
                                                                   +g+
        ∆(β ≥ 1) =       β                     2
                      αg+ − 1 if α >      β−1
                                          g−     β−1
                                               +g+


   With πD − πC and ∆, we can obtain Q, as in the uniform case. And in terms
of Q the differential equation for the time evolution is exactly Equation (10).
Therefore, the relaxation time is again given by Equation (11), and the critical
point is again obtained by making πD − πC = 0, which yields
                                           1
                              αc = Pg+       g β−1
                                       g=g− p g




                                        34
Hypergraphs describing real-world collaborations
IETF Dataset. In this last section, we provide an additional practical exam-
ple of the procedure for extracting the synergy factor from real data, based on
the publication records of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). This is
a large open international community of network designers, operators, vendors,
and researchers concerned with the evolution and the smooth operation of the
Internet. Similarly to the APS journals, the system is described by a hyper-
graph where authors who participated together in a project are part of the same
hyperlink. For the IETF dataset, we have 34280 articles. In Figure 9 we report
the histogram of the number of articles with a given number of authors. The
normalized version of this histogram is precisely the hyperlink distribution as a
function of the order of the hyperlink. Next, we retrieve the hyperdegree-order
distribution by assuming that the hyperlinks are equally distributed amongst the
nodes, meaning that for each order g the hyperdegree can be deduced from the
number of hyperlinks as k g = gLg /N . We assume that the reduced synergy fac-
tor is proportional to the hyperdegree distribution. This assumption means that
we need an additional parameter to provide the full expression of the reduced
synergy factor (and not the normalized one). This parameter can be obtained
                                             Pg=g+
by introducing the critical point condition g=g− pg (1 − r(g)) = 0. Notice that
pg is the gth component of the hyperdegree, and that r(g) is the synergy factor
we are looking for, which can be expressed as zpg under the     P aforementioned
assumption. This provides a simple equation to obtain z, z (pg )2 = 1, which
completes the procedure for extracting r(g).
    For this particular dataset, for completeness we fit the experimental data
with different analytical expressions. We numerically find those parameters that
minimize the distance with either R(g) or r(g). To validate the fit, the measure
we have selected is the distance between the normalized points of the analytical
and the experimental synergy factor, which is bounded to the [0, 1] interval.
Therefore, values close to 0 account for a good estimation of the data, otherwise
the opposite is true. To extract the parameters we have performed a search
process by limiting the possible values to meaningful regions of the parameter
space, and by discretizing this region into a finite set values. Then, we iterated
over all the sets, one for each parameter, and calculated the normalized distance
between the analytical expression and the experimental one for each iteration.
The best results that we have obtained in Figure 9 are given by

    e1 : r(g) = αg β e−γ(g−1)    (β, γ) = (1.382, 0.696)         (dr , dR ) = (0.054, 0.090)
                   β −γ(g−1)
    e2 : R(g) = αg e             (β, γ) = (2.89, 0.865)      (dr , dR ) = (0.065, 0.082)
                   β −γ(g−1)δ
    e3 : r(g) = αg e              (β, γ, δ) = (0.5, 0.12, 1.7)      (dr , dR ) = (0.039, 0.079)
                   β −γ(g−1)δ
    e4 : R(g) = αg e              (β, γ, δ) = (1.51, 0.13, 1.65)        (dr , dR ) = (0.041, 0.077)


Here ei is associated to the expressions as reported in the figure, α is obtained
analytically by applying the critical point condition and dr and dR the distance


                                        35
between the approximation and the points inferred from the data. Notice that
the (e1 , e2 ) and (e3 , e4 ) pairs of equations have the same structure, but their
parameters have been obtained by minimizing the distance with r(g) and R(g),
respectively. As before, β and γ are the benefits and costs fit parameter, that
respectively grow as a power law and decrease exponentially.

a)                                         b)




Figure 9: Synergy factors of the Internet Engineering Task Force dataset. We
extract the synergy factor as a function of the group size for a bibliographic
dataset in technology that contains the number of publications as a function of
the number of authors g. We infer the distribution in the order of the hyper-
degrees from the original dataset by assuming that the hyperlinks are evenly
distributed amongst the nodes. We then impose the critical point condition and
extract the value of the synergy factor under the hypothesis that r(g) is propor-
tional to p. Finally, the synergy factors r(g) in (a) and R(g) in (b) are factorized
into two analytical expressions that respectively account for the benefits of large
cooperations, and the costs associated to saturation effects.


APS Dataset. Here we provide some additional details about the dataset
of scientific collaborations from publications in the journals of the American
Physical Society described in the main text. In Table 1 we report the main
properties of the hypergraph describing each journal.
We clarify here the optimization method for β and γ. Once we have selected
                           f (g, α, β, γ) = αg β e−γ(g−1)                      (13)
as the base equation to fit the data, we run a first coarse-grained analysis on
the possible minimal and maximal limits of β and γ. These limits account for
the values outside which the approximation does not resemble the data. We
then discretize the domain of β and γ, and carry out a brute-force optimization,
namely, we evaluate a distance σ(r, f ) for all the possible combinations of β and
γ and select those with the smallest value. The function σ(r, f ) is bounded to the
[0, 1] interval, and measures the distance between the normalized synergy factor


                                        36
                                                              P
r and the normalized approximation f , calculated as σ = 1−   g min(r(g), f (g)).


    We also provide here the benefit and cost parameters associated to each
journal, as well as the normalized error between the maximum synergy factor
extracted directly from the data and from the analytical estimate. In Figure 10
we show the experimental and approximated reduced synergy factors r(g) as a
function of all hyperlink orders g contained in the publications dataset. This
figure is an extended version of Fig.4(a) in the main dataset.

        Journal           L      <g>       g(max r)     β       γ       dr
        PhysRev         47313    1.95         2       2.936   1.573   0.033
       PhysRevA         70502    3.07         3       2.679   0.986   0.067
       PhysRevB        171268    3.75         3       1.531   0.49    0.05
       PhysRevC         36290    5.98         3       0.02    0.075   0.146
       PhysRevD         74715    3.02         2       2.178   0.941   0.206
       PhysRevE         50988    2.93         3       3.84    1.41    0.048
    PhysRevApplied       327     5.39         5       3.356   0.62    0.09
      PhysRevLett      113674    4.57         3       0.848   0.33    0.175
    PhysRevSeriesI       1240    1.21         1       2.691   2.831   0.019
     PhysRevSTAB         2393    5.52         4       0.566   0.173   0.127
    PhysRevSTPER         484     2.42         3       2.75    1.21    0.078
       PhysRevX          611     5.28         5       1.85    0.416   0.127
     RevModPhys          3153    2.05         2       1.19    0.79    0.112

Table 1: American Physical Society Dataset. For each journal we report the
total number of hyperlinks L, the average hyperlink order < g >, the order
associated to the maximal synergy factor g(max r), the benefit parameter β
and the cost parameter γ (from the analytical approximation of r(g)), and the
normalized distance between the reduced synergy factor extracted from the data
empirically and after the fit, that we indicate as dr .




                                      37
                                1                                    8
                            2                                   9
                            3
                                                                 10
                            4
                                                                11
                            5
                                                                         12
                            6
                        7                                        13




Figure 10: Synergy factors of the American Physical Society dataset. Value of
the reduced synergy factor r(g) for all the values of the group size g available
in the dataset. These plots are an extended version of Fig.4 shown in the main
manuscript.




                                      38
