

	The AI Economist: Improving Equality and Productivity with AI-Driven Tax Policies - Salesforce

			Skip to Content		

	0%

Become an agentic enterprise with our refreshed step-by-step guide. Read it now

	AI

The AI Economist: Improving Equality and Productivity with AI-Driven Tax Policies

In this work, we focus on the opportunity to use AI to promote social welfare through the design of optimal tax policies in dynamic economies.

						Richard  Socher 					

						Alex Trott 					

							5 additional						

							authors						

			April 28, 2020

			14 min read		

Share article

Economic inequality is accelerating globally and is a growing concern due to its negative impact on economic opportunity, health and social welfare. Taxes are important tools for governments to reduce inequality. However, finding a tax policy that optimizes equality along with productivity is an unsolved problem. The AI Economist brings reinforcement learning (RL) to tax policy design for the first time to provide a purely simulation and data-driven solution. 
The AI Economist uses a two-level RL framework (agents and tax policy) to learn dynamic tax policies in principled economic simulations. This framework does not use prior world knowledge or modeling assumptions, can directly optimize for any socioeconomic objective, and learns from observable data alone.
Our experiments show the AI Economist can improve the trade-off between equality and productivity by 16%, compared to a prominent tax framework proposed by Emmanuel Saez, with even larger gains over an adaptation of the US Federal income tax and the free market. 
Without endorsing this particular schedule, it is interesting that the AI Economist implements qualitatively different tax schedules than the baselines, with higher top tax rates and lower rates for middle incomes. Furthermore, it is robust in the face of emergent tax gaming strategies.
Moreover, the AI Economist is effective in simulations with human participants, achieving competitive equality-productivity trade-offs with the baselines and significantly higher income-weighted average social welfare. This suggests promise in using this approach to improve social outcomes in real economies.
Our vision for the AI Economist is to enable an objective study of policy impact on real-world economies, at a level of complexity that traditional economic research cannot easily address. We believe the intersection of machine learning and economics presents a wide range of exciting research directions, and gives ample opportunity for machine learning to have positive social impact.

Reinforcement Learning for Social Good

Our work fits within a larger context of recent advances in RL. RL has been used to train AIs to win competitive games, such as Go, Dota, and Starcraft. In those settings, the RL objective is inherently adversarial (“beat-the-other-team”). Machine learning has also been used for the design of auction rules. In this work, we instead focus on the opportunity to use AI to promote social welfare through the design of optimal tax policies in dynamic economies.

Mastering The Game Of Go Without Human

                Knowledge. Silver, David, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja

        Huang, Arthur Guez, Thomas Hubert et al. Nature 550, no. 7676 (2017): 354-359.
Grandmaster Level In Starcraft Ii

                Using Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning. Vinyals, Oriol, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M.

        Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Junyoung Chung, David H. Choi et al. Nature 575, no. 7782 (2019):

        350-354.
Dota 2 With Large Scale Deep Reinforcement

                Learning. Berner, Christopher, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemysław Dębiak,

        Christy Dennison, David Farhi et al. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06680 (2019).
Optimal Auctions Through Deep

                Learning. Dütting, Paul, Zhe Feng, Harikrishna Narasimhan, David C. Parkes, and Sai

        Srivatsa Ravindranath. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1706-1715 (2019).

The Challenge of Optimal Tax Design

Many studies have shown that high income inequality can negatively impact economic growth and economic opportunity. Taxes can help reduce inequality, but it is hard to find the optimal tax policy. Economic theory cannot fully model the complexities of the real world. Instead, tax theory relies on simplifying assumptions that are hard to validate, for example, about the effect of taxes on how much people work. Moreover, real-world experimentation with taxes is almost impossible.

Inequality Matters. United Nations.
Literature Review On Income Inequality And The Effects On Social

                Outcomes. Beatrice d’Hombres, Anke Weber, and Leandro Elia. JRC Scientific and Policy

        Reports, 2012
Income Inequality and Health: What Have

                We Learned So Far? S. V. Subramanian, Ichiro Kawachi. Epidemiologic Reviews, Volume 26,

        Issue 1, July 2004, Pages 78–91
Rising Inequality Affecting More

                Than Two-Thirds Of The Globe, But It’s Not Inevitable: New UN Report. UN News.
Global Inequality.

        Inequality.org.
World

                Inequality Report. 2018

The Economic Model of Income, Labor, Skill, and Utility

Classic tax theory focuses on people who earn income by performing labor. A worker gains utility from income but incurs the cost of labor effort. At some point, the extra utility from additional income does not outweigh the cost of additional effort. 

For instance, working on weekends might earn you more money, but the effort might not be worth it to you.

A key assumption is that people differ in their skill level. Low-skilled workers receive a lower hourly wage, and so earn less money than high-skilled workers for the same amount of labor. This leads to inequality.

The Central Tax Dilemma

As a policy goal, a government may prefer to tax and redistribute income in order to improve equality. However, higher taxation can discourage work and may particularly affect high-skilled workers. An optimal tax policy optimizes this balance between equality and productivity. 

A prominent tax framework, proposed by Emmanuel Saez, derives a simple optimal tax formula. However, this formula requires knowing how labor responds to changes in tax rates (“elasticity”) and makes strong assumptions, for example, that the economy is static and workers do not gain new skills. Other work has studied dynamic economic systems, but needs simplifying assumptions in order to attain analytical solutions. For an extended overview of related work, see our technical paper.

Using Elasticities To Derive Optimal

                Income Tax Rates. Saez, Emmanuel

        The Review Of Economic Studies 68.1 (2001): 205-229.
The New Dynamic Public Finance. Kocherlakota, Narayana R.

        Princeton; Oxford: Princeton University Press, 2010.

Economic Simulation as a Learning Environment

The AI Economist is a purely simulation and data-driven approach to the design of optimal tax policies. It uses a principled economic simulation with both workers and a policy maker (a “planner” in the economics literature), all of whom are collectively learning using reinforcement learning. 

Gathering, Trading and Building

The simulation uses a two-dimensional world. There are two types of resources: wood and stone. Resources are scarce: they appear in the world at a limited rate. Workers move around, gather and trade resources, and earn income by building houses (this costs stone and wood). Houses block access: workers cannot move through the houses built by others. The simulation runs this economy over the course of an episode, which is analogous to a “working career.” 

Skill and Utility

A key feature is that workers have different skills. Higher-skilled workers earn more income for building houses, and thus more utility. Building houses also takes effort, which lowers utility. Workers also pay income taxes and the collected tax is redistributed evenly among the workers. Together, these economic factors and the various competitive drivers mean that workers need to be strategic in order to maximize their utility. 

Emergent Specialization

Our economic simulation produces rich behavior when AI agents (the agents are the workers in the economy) learn to maximize their utility. A salient feature is specialization: AI agents with lower skill become gatherer-and-sellers and earn income by collecting and selling stone and wood. Agents with higher skill specialize as buyer-and-builders and purchase stone and wood in order to more quickly build houses. 

We do not impose such roles or behaviors directly. Rather, specialization emerges because differently skilled workers learn to balance their income and effort. This demonstrates the richness of the economic simulation and builds trust that agents respond to economic drivers. Complex emergent economic behavior has been previously studied in economics through agent-based modeling, but this has largely proceeded without the benefit of recent advances in AI.

Agent-Based Modeling: Methods And

                Techniques For Simulating Human Systems. Bonabeau, Eric.

        Proceedings Of The National Academy Of Sciences 99, no. suppl 3 (2002): 7280-7287.
An Agent Based Model For Studying

                Optimal Tax Collection Policy Using Experimental Data: The Cases Of Chile And Italy.

        Garrido, Nicolás and Mittone, Luigi.

        The Journal of Socio-Economics 42 (2013): 24-30.

Optimal Tax Design as Learned Reward Design Using Reinforcement Learning

Reinforcement learning is a powerful framework in which agents learn from experience collected through trial-and-error. We use model-free RL, in which agents do not use any prior world knowledge or modeling assumptions. Another benefit of RL is that agents can optimize for any objective. 

In our setting, this means that a tax policy can be learned that optimizes any social objective, and without knowledge of workers’ utility functions or skills.

Finding optimal taxes when both workers and the policy maker are learning poses a challenging two-level RL problem:

In the inner loop, self-interested workers perform labor, receive income, and pay taxes. They learn through trial-and-error how to adapt their behavior to maximize utility. Given a fixed tax policy, this is a standard multi-agent reinforcement learning problem with a fixed reward function.
In the outer loop, tax policies are adapted in order to optimize the social objective. This creates a non-stationary learning environment in which the RL agents need to constantly adapt to a changing utility landscape. 
In other words: because the post-tax income for the same type and amount of labor can change over time, agent decisions that were optimal in the past, might not be optimal in the present. 

This two-level learning problem poses a technical challenge, as the simultaneous behavioral changes of  agents and changes to the tax policy can lead to unstable learning behavior. We have found that a combination of techniques, including the use of learning curricula and entropy regularization, enable stable convergence. These are described in our technical paper.

AI-Driven Tax Policies Improve the Trade-off between Equality and Productivity

Our reinforcement learning approach produces dynamic tax policies that yield a substantially better trade-off between equality and productivity than baseline methods. 

Periodic Income Taxes

We compared the AI Economist with

The free market with no taxation or redistribution.
A scaled 2018 US Federal tax schedule. This is a progressive tax: marginal tax rates increase with income.
An analytical tax formula proposed by Emmanuel Saez. In our setting, this yields a regressive tax schedule: marginal tax rates decrease with income.

All tax policies make use of seven income brackets, following the framework of the US Federal Income Tax schedule, but varying in their tax rates. The total tax is calculated by summing up the tax for each bracket in which there is income. 

Episodes are divided into ten tax periods of equal length. Throughout each tax period agents interact with the environment to earn income and, at the end of the period, incomes are taxed according to the period’s tax schedule and redistributed evenly to workers. The tax policy of the AI Economist allows the tax schedule to vary across periods.

We set-up the economic environment such that the fraction of worker incomes per income bracket is in rough alignment with those in the US economy. 

Improved Economic Outcomes with the AI Economist

Our experiments show that the AI Economist achieves at least a 16% gain in the trade-off between equality and productivity compared to the next best framework, which is provided by the Saez framework. The AI Economist improves equality by 47% compared to the free-market at only an 11% decrease in productivity.

Wealth Transfer and Tax Impact

Compared with the baselines, the AI Economist features a more idiosyncratic structure: a blend of progressive and regressive schedules. In particular, it sets a higher top tax rate (income above 510), a lower tax rate for incomes between 160 and 510, and both higher and lower tax rates on incomes below 160. 

The collected taxes are redistributed evenly among the agents. In effect, the lower-income agents receive a net subsidy, even though their tax rates are higher (before subsidies). In other words, under the AI Economist, the lowest incomes have a lower tax burden compared to baselines. 

We observed that under the Saez framework, the gatherer-and-sellers collect fewer resources than with the AI Economist. This forces the buyer-and-builders to spend more time to collect resources themselves, which lowers their productivity. At the same time, the Saez framework yields less equality through redistribution as its tax schedule is more regressive. In sum, this yields a worse balance between productivity and equality.

Robustness Against Tax Gaming Strategies

Finding optimal taxes can be challenging because AI agents can learn to “game” tax schemes. In our simulation, agents learn that they can lower their average effective tax by alternating between earning high and low incomes, rather than earning a smooth income across periods. This tax gaming occurs for the Saez tax and AI Economist due to their regressive tax rates (higher income brackets have lower tax rates). The performance of the AI Economist demonstrates that it is effective even in the face of strategic agent behavior, and the emergence of this behavior underscores the richness of the simulation-based framework.

AI-Driven Tax Policy and Real People

We also explored whether the AI Economist is effective in experiments with human participants. These experiments used a simpler ruleset to provide better usability, for instance, removing the ability to trade. However, the same economic drivers and trade-offs applied. Participants were paid real money for the utility they gained from building houses. Hence, participants were incentivized to build the number of houses that would maximize their utility. The stakes were sufficiently high: participants were paid at an average rate of at least twice the US minimum wage.

We tested all methods in a zero-shot transfer learning setting, by using the tax rates from the AI-only world in the human setting without retraining. This is an interesting evaluation, because retraining a tax policy might require a large amount of human data. The only modification was to scale down all income brackets by a factor of three to account for lower human productivity compared to AI agents. The full details are in our technical paper. 

Camelback Tax Schedule Yields Strong Equality-Productivity Trade-offs

For the experiments with human participants, we selected from the set of trained AI-Driven policies a tax schedule shaped like a camelback. We compared this schedule with baselines in experiments with participants recruited on Amazon Mechanical Turk.

In 125 games with 100+ US-based participants, the camelback schedule achieved an equality-vs-productivity trade-off that is significantly better than the free market and competitive with other baselines. Participants were paid more than $20/hour on average. Compared with AI agents, people were more prone to suboptimal adversarial behaviors, such as blocking other workers. This significantly increased the variance in productivity.

Interestingly, the camelback schedule is qualitatively different from the baselines. However, the relative performance of the camelback versus the baselines is consistent across the experiments with only AI and with only people. 

Significantly Higher Weighted Social Welfare

The camelback tax also statistically significantly outperformed all baselines in regard to an alternative, established social welfare metric that weights the utility of lower income workers more than higher income ones.

Future Directions

The strong zero-shot transfer performance on human play is surprising and encouraging. The camelback tax was competitive with, or outperformed, baselines, without recalibration and while being applied with different rulesets and worker behaviors. As such, these results suggest promise in the use of the AI Economist as a tool for finding good tax policies for real economies. 

AI-based economic simulations still have limitations. They do not yet model human-behavioral factors and interactions between people, including social considerations, and they consider a relatively small economy. However, these kinds of simulations provide a transparent and objective view on the economic consequences of different tax policies. Moreover, this simulation and data-driven approach can be used together with any social objective in order to automatically find a tax policy with strong performance. Future simulations could improve the fidelity of economic agents using real-world data, while advances in large-scale RL and engineering could increase the scope of economic simulations. 

We believe that this kind of research has great potential for increasing equality and productivity in real economies, helping to promote more just and healthy societies. We also hope that the AI Economist can foster transparency, reproducibility, and an open and facts-based discussion about applying machine learning to economic decision-making through our public research publications and open-source code. As such, our hope is that future economic AI models can robustly and transparently augment real-world economic policy-making and, in doing so, improve social welfare.

Ethical Considerations

Ethics, trust, and transparency are an integral part of Salesforce’s approach to AI research. While the current version of the AI Economist is a limited representation of the real world, and is not a tool that could be currently used with malintent to reconfigure tax policy, we recognize that it could be possible to manipulate future, large-scale iterations of the AI Economist to increase inequality and hide this action behind the results of an AI system. 

Furthermore, either out of ignorance or malice, bad training data may result in biased recommendations, particularly in cases where users train the tool using their own data. For instance, the under-representation of communities and segments of the work-force in the training data could lead to bias in AI-Driven tax policies. This work also opens up the possibility of using richer, observational data to set individual taxation, an area where we anticipate a strong need for robust debate.

We encourage anyone utilizing the AI Economist to publish a model card or data sheet that describes the ethical considerations of AI-Driven tax schedules in order to increase transparency, and by extension, trust, in the system.

In order to responsibly publish this research, we have taken the following measures: 

To ensure accountability on our part, we shared the paper and an assessment of the ethical risks, mitigation strategies, and assessment of safety to publish with the following external reviewers: Dr. Simon Chesterman, Provost’s Chair and Dean of the National University of Singapore Faculty of Law, and Lofred Madzou, AI Project Lead at the World Economic Forum’s Center for the Fourth Industrial Revolution. None of the reviewers identified additional ethical concerns or mitigation strategies that should be employed. All affirmed that the research is safe to publish.
To increase transparency, we are publishing this blog post, as well as a comprehensive technical paper, thereby allowing robust debate and broad multi-disciplinary discussion of our work.
To further promote transparency, we will have a timed open-source release of our code for the simulation and training. This does not prevent future misuse, but we believe, at the current level of fidelity, transparency is key to promote grounded discussion and future research.

With these mitigation strategies and other considerations in place, we believe this research is safe to publish.

Additional Information

Paper: https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.13332

The AI Economist: Improving Equality and Productivity with AI-Driven Tax Policies, Stephan Zheng, Alexander Trott, Sunil Srinivasa, Nikhil Naik, Melvin Gruesbeck, David C. Parkes, Richard Socher. 

Acknowledgements

This work was a joint effort with contributions from: 

Stephan Zheng, Alex Trott, Sunil Srinivasa, Nikhil Naik, Melvin Gruesbeck, Kathy Baxter, David Parkes, and Richard Socher.

We thank Lofred Madzou, Simon Chesterman, Rob Reich, Mia de Kuijper, Scott Kominers, Gabriel Kriendler, Stefanie Stantcheva, and Thomas Piketty for valuable discussions.

We also thank the following people for their valuable support:

Video animation: Leo Ogawa Lillrank, Ivy Lillrank.
Marketing: Katherine Siu.
Public Relations: Kate Wesson, Steve Mnich.

References

        Inequality Matters. United Nations.

        Literature Review On Income Inequality And The Effects On Social Outcomes. Beatrice d’Hombres,

        Anke Weber, and Leandro Elia. JRC Scientific and Policy Reports, 2012.

        Income Inequality And Health: What

                Have We Learned So Far? S. V. Subramanian, Ichiro Kawachi.

        Epidemiologic Reviews, Volume 26, Issue 1, July 2004, Pages 78–91.

        Rising Inequality Affecting

                More Than Two-Thirds Of The Globe, But It’s Not Inevitable: New Un Report. UN News.

        Global

                Inequality. Inequality.org.

        World

                Inequality Report. 2018.

        Using Elasticities To Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates. Saez, Emmanuel. The Review Of Economic

        Studies 68.1 (2001): 205-229.

        Mastering The Game Of Go Without Human

                Knowledge. Silver, David, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja

        Huang, Arthur Guez, Thomas Hubert et al. Nature 550, no. 7676 (2017): 354-359.

Grandmaster Level In Starcraft Ii

                Using Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning. Vinyals, Oriol, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M.

        Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Junyoung Chung, David H. Choi et al. Nature 575, no. 7782 (2019):

        350-354.

        Dota 2 With Large Scale Deep

                Reinforcement Learning. Berner, Christopher, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung,

        Przemysław Dębiak, Christy Dennison, David Farhi et al. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06680 (2019).

        Optimal Auctions Through Deep Learning. Dütting, Paul, Zhe Feng, Harikrishna Narasimhan,

        David C. Parkes, and Sai Srivatsa Ravindranath. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1706-1715

        (2019).

        An Agent Based Model For

                Studying Optimal Tax Collection Policy Using Experimental Data: The Cases Of Chile And

                Italy. Garrido, Nicolás and Mittone, Luigi. The Journal of Socio-Economics 42 (2013):

        24-30.

        Agent-Based Modeling: Methods And

                Techniques For Simulating Human Systems. Bonabeau, Eric. Proceedings of the national

        academy of sciences 99, no. suppl 3 (2002): 7280-7287.

Share article

Just For You

					Build Your Dreamforce 2026 Agenda				

	4 min read

					What Does Salesforce Do?				

	18 min read

Explore related content by topic

						AI					

						AI Research					

															Richard Socher

					Richard Socher is Chief Scientist at Salesforce where he leads the company’s research efforts and works on bringing state of the art artificial intelligence solutions to Salesforce.				

					More by Richard Socher					

															Alex Trott

					More by Alex					

															Stephan Zheng

					More by Stephan					

															Sunil Srinivasa

					More by Sunil					

															Nikhil Naik

					More by Nikhil					

															Melvin Gruesbeck

					More by Melvin					

															David Parkes

					More by David					

			Get the latest articles in your inbox.		

			Sign up now		

					Just For You				

					What 2,000 Leaders Told Us About Winning With Agentic AI				

	5 min read

					What’s the Real Cost of Disconnected Data? Here Are the Numbers				

	4 min read

					Assist Your Front Desk Team With an AI Receptionist				

	5 min read

					Scale Customer Support With AI Agents: 5 Service Tips For SMBs				

	6 min read

					How to Make AI a Trusted Business Partner With Anti-Hallucination Practices				

	9 min read

					Salesforce Connectors: CRM Integrations For Small Business				

	4 min read

					5 AI Service Report Insights for Growing Businesses				

	6 min read

					Agentic AI in HR: Why Employee Trust Starts with the Data Foundation				

	5 min read

Get the latest articles in your inbox.

							Sign up now

		Close

			Get the latest articles in your inbox.		

360 Highlights

							Selected

IT

							Selected

Commerce

							Selected

Marketing

							Selected

Service

							Selected

Sales

							Selected

		Please select at least one newsletter.	

						Email Address
						Enter a valid e-mail address

		Select your country
					United States
					Afghanistan
					Albania
					Algeria
					American Samoa
					Andorra
					Anguilla
					Antarctica
					Antigua & Barbuda
					Argentina
					Armenia
					Aruba
					Australia
					Austria
					Azerbaijan
					Bahamas
					Bahrain
					Bangladesh
					Barbados
					Belarus
					Belgium
					Belize
					Benin
					Bermuda
					Bhutan
					Bolivia
					Bosnia & Herzegovina
					Botswana
					Bouvet Island
					Brazil
					British Indian Ocean Territory
					British Virgin Islands
					Brunei
					Bulgaria
					Burkina Faso
					Burundi
					Cambodia
					Cameroon
					Canada
					Cape Verde
					Caribbean Netherlands
					Cayman Islands
					Central African Republic
					Chad
					Chile
					China
					Christmas Island
					Cocos (Keeling) Islands
					Colombia
					Comoros
					Congo - Brazzaville
					Congo - Kinshasa
					Cook Islands
					Costa Rica
					Croatia
					Curaçao
					Cyprus
					Czechia
					Côte d’Ivoire
					Denmark
					Djibouti
					Dominica
					Dominican Republic
					Ecuador
					Egypt
					El Salvador
					Equatorial Guinea
					Eritrea
					Estonia
					Eswatini
					Ethiopia
					Falkland Islands
					Faroe Islands
					Fiji
					Finland
					France
					French Guiana
					French Polynesia
					French Southern Territories
					Gabon
					Gambia
					Georgia
					Germany
					Ghana
					Gibraltar
					Greece
					Greenland
					Grenada
					Guadeloupe
					Guam
					Guatemala
					Guinea
					Guinea-Bissau
					Guyana
					Haiti
					Heard & McDonald Islands
					Honduras
					Hong Kong SAR China
					Hungary
					Iceland
					India
					Indonesia
					Ireland
					Israel
					Italy
					Jamaica
					Japan
					Jordan
					Kazakhstan
					Kenya
					Kiribati
					Kuwait
					Kyrgyzstan
					Laos
					Latvia
					Lebanon
					Lesotho
					Liberia
					Liechtenstein
					Lithuania
					Luxembourg
					Macao SAR China
					Madagascar
					Malawi
					Malaysia
					Maldives
					Mali
					Malta
					Marshall Islands
					Martinique
					Mauritania
					Mauritius
					Mayotte
					Mexico
					Micronesia
					Moldova
					Monaco
					Mongolia
					Montserrat
					Morocco
					Mozambique
					Myanmar (Burma)
					Namibia
					Nauru
					Nepal
					Netherlands
					New Caledonia
					New Zealand
					Nicaragua
					Niger
					Nigeria
					Niue
					Norfolk Island
					North Macedonia
					Northern Mariana Islands
					Norway
					Oman
					Pakistan
					Palau
					Panama
					Papua New Guinea
					Paraguay
					Peru
					Philippines
					Pitcairn Islands
					Poland
					Portugal
					Puerto Rico
					Qatar
					Romania
					Russia
					Rwanda
					Réunion
					Samoa
					San Marino
					Saudi Arabia
					Senegal
					Serbia
					Seychelles
					Sierra Leone
					Singapore
					Sint Maarten
					Slovakia
					Slovenia
					Solomon Islands
					Somalia
					South Africa
					South Georgia & South Sandwich Islands
					South Korea
					Spain
					Sri Lanka
					St. Helena
					St. Kitts & Nevis
					St. Lucia
					St. Pierre & Miquelon
					St. Vincent & Grenadines
					Suriname
					Svalbard & Jan Mayen
					Sweden
					Switzerland
					São Tomé & Príncipe
					Taiwan
					Tajikistan
					Tanzania
					Thailand
					Timor-Leste
					Togo
					Tokelau
					Tonga
					Trinidad & Tobago
					Tunisia
					Turkey
					Turkmenistan
					Turks & Caicos Islands
					Tuvalu
					U.S. Outlying Islands
					U.S. Virgin Islands
					Uganda
					Ukraine
					United Arab Emirates
					United Kingdom
					Uruguay
					Uzbekistan
					Vanuatu
					Vatican City
					Venezuela
					Vietnam
					Wallis & Futuna
					Western Sahara
					Yemen
					Zambia
					Zimbabwe

	Select your Country
	Select your Country

		State/province
					北海道 - Hokkaido
					青森県 - Aomori
					岩手県 - Iwate
					宮城県 - Miyagi
					秋田県 - Akita
					山形県 - Yamagata
					福島県 - Fukushima
					茨城県 - Ibaraki
					栃木県 - Tochigi
					群馬県 - Gunma
					埼玉県 - Saitama
					千葉県 - Chiba
					東京都 - Tokyo
					神奈川県 - Kanagawa
					新潟県 - Niigata
					富山県 - Toyama
					石川県 - Ishikawa
					福井県 - Fukui
					山梨県 - Yamanashi
					長野県 - Nagano
					岐阜県 - Gifu
					静岡県 - Shizuoka
					愛知県 - Aichi
					三重県 - Mie
					滋賀県 - Shiga
					京都府 - Kyoto
					大阪府 - Osaka
					兵庫県 - Hyogo
					奈良県 - Nara
					和歌山県 - Wakayama
					鳥取県 - Tottori
					島根県 - Shimane
					岡山県 - Okayama
					広島県 - Hiroshima
					山口県 - Yamaguchi
					徳島県 - Tokushima
					香川県 - Kagawa
					愛媛県 - Ehime
					高知県 - Kochi
					福岡県 - Fukuoka
					佐賀県 - Saga
					長崎県 - Nagasaki
					熊本県 - Kumamoto
					大分県 - Oita
					宮崎県 - Miyazaki
					鹿児島県 - Kagoshima
					沖縄県 - Okinawa

	Select a state/province
	Select a state/province

		State/province
					Alberta
					British Columbia
					Manitoba
					New Brunswick
					Newfoundland
					Northwest Territories
					Nova Scotia
					Nunavut
					Ontario
					Prince Edward Island
					Quebec
					Saskatchewan
					Yukon

	Select a state/province
	Select a state/province

		State/province
					Alabama
					Alaska
					Arizona
					Arkansas
					California
					Colorado
					Connecticut
					Delaware
					District of Columbia
					Florida
					Georgia
					Hawaii
					Idaho
					Illinois
					Indiana
					Iowa
					Kansas
					Kentucky
					Louisiana
					Maine
					Maryland
					Massachusetts
					Michigan
					Minnesota
					Mississippi
					Missouri
					Montana
					Nebraska
					Nevada
					New Hampshire
					New Jersey
					New Mexico
					New York
					North Carolina
					North Dakota
					Ohio
					Oklahoma
					Oregon
					Pennsylvania
					Rhode Island
					South Carolina
					South Dakota
					Tennessee
					Texas
					Utah
					Vermont
					Virginia
					Washington
					West Virginia
					Wisconsin
					Wyoming

	Select a state/province
	Select a state/province

			Yes,
			I would like to receive the Salesforce 360 Highlights newsletter as well as marketing emails regarding Salesforce products, services, and events. I can unsubscribe at any time.		

						I agree to the Privacy Statement and to the handling of my personal information. In particular, I consent to the transfer of my personal information to other countries, including the United States, for the purpose of hosting and processing the information as set forth in the Privacy Statement. Learn More

							I understand that these countries may not have the same data protection laws as the country from which I provide my personal information. For more information, click here.						

					Please read and agree to the Master Subscription Agreement				

				By registering, you confirm that you agree to the processing of your personal data by Salesforce as described in the Privacy Statement.			

						Sign up now					

			Thanks, you're subscribed!		

								CALL US AT
																		1-800-664-9073

							New to Salesforce?

								What is Salesforce?

								Best CRM software

								Explore all products

								What is cloud computing

								Customer success

								Product pricing

							About Salesforce

								Our story

								Press

								Blog

								Careers

								Trust

								Salesforce.org

								Sustainability

								Investors

								Legal

							Popular Links

								Salesforce Mobile

								AppExchange

								Dreamforce

								CRM software

								Salesforce LIVE

								Salesforce for startups

				Worldwide

Americas

				América Latina (Español)

				Brasil (Português)

				Canada (English)

				Canada (Français)

				United States (English)

Europe, Middle East, and Africa

				España (Español)

				Deutschland (Deutsch)

				France (Français)

				Italia (Italiano)

				Nederland (Nederlands)

				Sverige (Svenska)

				United Kingdom (English)

				All other countries (English)

Asia Pacific

				Australia (English)

				India (English)

				日本 (日本語)

				中国 (简体中文)

				香港 (繁體中文)

				台灣 (繁體中文)

				한국 (한국어)

				Malaysia (English)

				ประเทศไทย (ไทย)

				All other countries (English)

									© Copyright 2026 Salesforce, Inc. All rights reserved. Various trademarks held by their respective owners. Salesforce, Inc. Salesforce Tower, 415 Mission Street, 3rd Floor, San Francisco, CA 94105, United States

Legal

Terms of Service

Privacy Information

Responsible Disclosure

Trust

Contact

Cookie Preferences
Your Privacy Choices			

			Copied

					Close

					Previous

					Next

