                                               LLM2Swarm: Robot Swarms that Responsively
                                                Reason, Plan, and Collaborate through LLMs


                                                               Volker Strobel                                Marco Dorigo
                                                                   IRIDIA                                        IRIDIA
                                                        Université Libre de Bruxellles                Université Libre de Bruxellles
arXiv:2410.11387v3 [cs.RO] 30 Oct 2024




                                                             Brussels, Belgium                             Brussels, Belgium
                                                         volker.strobel@ulb.be                           mdorigo@ulb.ac.be

                                                                                    Mario Fritz
                                                                    CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
                                                                               St. Ingbert, Germany
                                                                                 fritz@cispa.de



                                                                                         Abstract
                                                     Robot swarms are composed of many simple robots that communicate and col-
                                                     laborate to fulfill complex tasks. Robot controllers usually need to be specified
                                                     by experts on a case-by-case basis via programming code. This process is time-
                                                     consuming, prone to errors, and unable to take into account all situations that may
                                                     be encountered during deployment. On the other hand, recent Large Language Mod-
                                                     els (LLMs) have demonstrated reasoning and planning capabilities, introduced new
                                                     ways to interact with and program machines, and incorporate both domain-specific
                                                     and commonsense knowledge. Hence, we propose to address the aforementioned
                                                     challenges by integrating LLMs with robot swarms and show the potential in proofs
                                                     of concept (showcases). For this integration, we explore two approaches. The first
                                                     approach is ‘indirect integration,’ where LLMs are used to synthesize and validate
                                                     the robot controllers. This approach may reduce development time and human error
                                                     before deployment. Moreover, during deployment, it could be used for on-the-fly
                                                     creation of new robot behaviors. The second approach is ‘direct integration,’ where
                                                     each robot locally executes a separate LLM instance during deployment for robot-
                                                     robot collaboration and human-swarm interaction. These local LLM instances
                                                     enable each robot to reason, plan, and collaborate using natural language, as demon-
                                                     strated in our showcases where the robots are able to detect a variety of anomalies,
                                                     without prior information about the nature of these anomalies. To enable further
                                                     research on our mainly conceptual contribution, we release the software and videos
                                                     for our LLM2Swarm system: https://github.com/Pold87/LLM2Swarm.


                                         1    Introduction
                                         Robot swarms consist of many simple robots that accomplish complex tasks by collaborating with
                                         each other [11; 20]. They are characterized by the absence of a central control unit, which makes
                                         them more scalable and flexible than other multi-robot systems. Thanks to their decentralized control
                                         and redundancy, robot swarms can potentially continue functioning even if individual robots fail [42].
                                         These features could make robot swarms ideal for applications where fast reactions to unforeseen
                                         events are required, such as environmental monitoring and disaster response [12; 43].
                                         In robot swarms, communication and interaction protocols between robots usually need to be specified
                                         by experts on a case-by-case basis via programming code [28]: Given a specific task, a human designer

                                         Preprint.
needs to develop and implement the corresponding program logic. The process of writing such code
is often time-consuming and prone to errors. Even though there are attempts to automate this
process [15; 17; 40; 39; 14], these attempts usually still require expert knowledge at design time and
the controllers cannot react to unforeseen events at deployment time.
Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) have led to new possibilities and proposals for
the integration of AI into different technologies, such as virtual assistants and search engines [18]. In
particular, there have also been proposals to integrate LLMs into multi-robot systems [5; 32]. With
this paper, we propose to integrate LLMs into a specific kind of multi-robot system: robot swarms.
We provide the first systematic exploration of the potential of LLM-enabled robot swarms (we call
our system LLM2Swarm). We demonstrate the resulting opportunities in a series of proofs of concept
(showcases), implemented in the ARGoS robot swarm simulator [34], and preliminary hardware
tests using a Raspberry Pi 5. For this exploration, we propose two primary approaches of integrating
LLMs into robot swarms.
The first approach is “indirect integration,” where LLMs are used to synthesize and validate the robot
controllers (before and/or during deployment). This approach may save development time for the
designer by automating parts of the design process. In addition, it could dramatically simplify the
process of writing controllers, as no programming knowledge is necessary. The approach ensures
that robot swarms responsively react, as they execute their classical (synthesized) control software,
instead of waiting for LLM-generated responses.
The second approach for integrating LLMs into robot swarms is “direct integration,” where each
robot locally executes a separate LLM instance during deployment. With this online integration, the
local LLM instances enable each robot to reason, plan, and collaborate using natural language. With
these new and improved capabilities, we aim to enhance robot swarms’ adaptivity, efficiency, and
intelligence, making them more capable of handling complex tasks in unpredictable environments,
both for robot-robot collaboration and human-swarm interaction.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:
      1. We introduce LLM2Swarm for integrating LLMs into robot swarms and explore the resulting
         opportunities and challenges.
      2. We provide (video) showcases for controller synthesis, robot-robot collaboration, and human-
         swarm interaction in simulation.
      3. We release our LLM2Swarm setup as open-source software. Videos and code can be
         downloaded at https://github.com/Pold87/LLM2Swarm.


2   Related work
Our work is related to three topics: controller synthesis, LLMs as agents, and LLMs in robotics. In
the following, we briefly present related work from these fields and highlight how our vision differs.
Controller synthesis. There are several related works on controller synthesis, both from the field
of swarm robotics (e.g., AutoMoDe [15; 17], evolutionary approaches [40], neural network con-
trollers [39]) and from more theoretical fields, such as computer aided verification [14]. LLMs have
also already been used for the controller synthesis of single robots [41]. However, these approaches
still rely on expert knowledge (e.g., formal specification languages) during design time, cannot
flexibly react to unforeseen situations during deployment, or do not support multiple agents or robots.
LLMs in multi-agent systems. LLMs are increasingly being integrated into other systems to enhance
their capabilities (e.g., as part of search engines) [18]. In the recent past, there has been an increasing
interest in letting multiple LLMs interact and discuss [1; 6]. An overview of the integration of LLMs
into multi-agent systems for various tasks has been given by Guo et al. [19]. In contrast to these
works, our target platforms are physical robots. The previous works did not take into account how to
synthesize robot controllers, how to deal with mobility, sensor information, and actuators, and how to
map sensors and actuators to LLM inputs and responses.
LLMs in robotics. Integrating LLMs into other systems has also led to several new applications in
robotics [26], for example for task planning [9], centralized motion planning [24], and human-robot
interaction [41]. As our target platforms are robot swarms, in the following, we are considering works


                                                    2
                                                                                   Mission start
                                Human

                                                          Designer                                            Operator



                                 LLM
                                                  Powerful LLM + lightweight LLM                        Lightweight on-device LLM
    Created by Lucas Rathgeb
    from the Noun Project




                               Controller
                                                  Generated by human and powerful LLM;
                                                       informed by lightweight LLM
                                                                                               Synthesized and informed by lightweight LLM


                               Platform
                                                             Simulated robots                                Real robots



Figure 1: Overview of LLM2Swarm – LLM-enabled robot swarms. LLM2Swarm involves four
key system components: humans, LLMs, controllers, and platforms. Before mission start: a human
designer uses both manual design and LLM2Swarm’s controller synthesis module (which prompts a
powerful LLM) to generate a robot controller. This controller is executed in simulation, and uses
one lightweight LLM per robot to simulate on-device execution of LLM2Swarm’s direct integration
module. After mission start: a human operator interacts with the real robots’ lightweight on-device
LLMs to instruct the swarm and to receive information about the swarm state. These LLMs also
interact with other robots’ controllers in order to reason, plan, and collaborate. In addition, the
lightweight LLMs can synthesize new robot controllers on-the-fly during the mission.


that use a separate LLM instance for each embodied agent. Chen et al. [5] perform motion planning
(e.g., to move a box to a target), with up to 32 simulated robots (in 2D grid environments and using
robotic arms). Mandi et al. [32] perform motion planning (of robotic arms) with up to three robots.
Zhang et al. [44] study how two virtual humans can communicate via LLMs. These research efforts,
however, have one or more of the following limitations: a low number of robots/agents, lack of
decentralization, no consideration of mobile robots with physics-based dynamics, no consideration of
typical swarm robotics tasks, or no consideration of hardware limitations; therefore, their applicability
to swarm robotics is limited.


3                                LLM-enabled robot swarms: LLM2Swarm

To give an overview of how our LLM2Swarm system yields LLM-enabled robot swarms, we illustrate
the proposed temporal flow and interactions in Figure 1. LLM2Swarm provides two main modules: an
indirect integration module for automating controller design (both before and during deployment) and
a direct integration module for enhancing robots’ reasoning, planning, and collaboration capabilities
during deployment.

3.1                                Indirect Integration

We propose to use LLMs ‘indirectly’ for controller synthesis, i.e., automated creation of code before
or during deployment. For this indirect integration, LLM2Swarm provides a module (see Figure 2)
that translates a description of a robot controller in natural language to an actual robot controller.
Before the mission start, a human designer generates a robot controller draft using manual design.
Parts of these controllers can be synthesized by LLM2Swarm, using a powerful LLM (LLM2Swarm
supports any model provided by OpenAI’s API or by Ollama for local execution). Also during
deployment, this LLM2Swarm module can lead to increased autonomy of a robot swarm—as missing
controller parts can be synthesized on the fly by on-board LLMs. Based on our experiments, we
propose the following three-step process to automate controller synthesis:

Step 1 – Syntax validation. The first validation is to check whether a synthesized controller
contains syntactically correct and executable code. Consequently, a syntax validator is essential to


                                                                                     3
                       Controller
                       examples



           Desired                  Controller    ARGoS           Syntax        Logic      Security      Final
                         LLM                                                               checking
          controller                  draft      simulator       validation   validation               controller


                                                                  if failed    if failed   if failed

                                                                 Feedback
                                                                  prompt


Figure 2: Flow of LLM2Swarm’s controller synthesis module. Using LLM2Swarm’s controller
synthesis module, a user begins by specifying the desired controller in natural language. This
specification, together with controller examples, is used as part of an LLM prompt to synthesize a
robot controller. The synthesized controller draft is then executed directly in the ARGoS simulator. If
ARGoS detects any syntax errors, the errors are reported back to the LLM, with the request to resolve
them. If no syntax errors are found, the user can proceed to validate the controller logic: if the robot
behavior is not as expected, the user provides information about both the robots’ expected behavior
and actual behavior to the LLM with the request to improve the controller. Once the controller logic
is validated, the user can ask the LLM to check for any security vulnerabilities. After all validation
steps are completed, the final controller, specified in programming code, is ready for deployment.


prevent the execution of erroneous code, which could lead to disastrous outcomes (e.g., erroneous
code controlling a drone could result in crashes and severe hardware damage).

Step 2 – Logic validation. Validating whether the generated code performs the intended task as ex-
pected is crucial but challenging, as there is not always a clear ground truth. If the code is synthesized
before deployment, its resulting behavior can be analyzed and improved using LLM2Swarm—either
by human feedback or in the future by the video analysis capabilities of LLMs (although the current
video analysis capabilities are limited1 , we believe that future developments will improve this capabil-
ity). During deployment, however, such verification is usually not possible—in addition, simulations
cannot account for all possible real-world scenarios. Alternatives for evaluating a controller during
deployment could be reinforcement learning to compare different controllers [2] or probabilistic
model checking based on mathematical analysis [27].

Step 3 – Security checking. It is important to verify whether the LLM-synthesized controller
contains security issues or potentially malicious parts (e.g., the controller could contain logic to sabo-
tage other robots). Identifying security issues can be based on the Common Weakness Enumeration
(CWE), a catalog that lists known exploits in programming languages and hardware components2 . In
addition, there are model checkers and LLMs fine-tuned to the task of identifying weaknesses that
are part of the CWE. LLM2Swarm enables preliminary security checking through an LLM prompt
with the request of identifying malicious parts and other weaknesses in a synthesized controller.

3.2         Direct Integration

For directly integrating LLMs into robot swarms, we propose to execute one LLM per robot, locally
on each robot’s hardware (see Figure 3), which requires lightweight LLMs. Currently, LLM2Swarm
simulates local execution: In our showcases, each robot is connected to a separate external LLM,
allowing us to run LLMs of any capacity and thus simulate today what we anticipate for the future.
For direct integration, the LLMs’ prompts are fed with sensor information (including messages
received from other robots), and the outputs of the LLMs are mapped to robot actions. During
deployment, a human operator may interact with these on-board LLMs to supervise the mission.

      1
      Even though OpenAI’s API does not yet support video analysis, in a preliminary experiment, we tested
ChatGPT-4o’s video analysis capabilities by uploading a video of random-walk behavior in an ARGoS simulation
and asking whether the swarm demonstrated successful flocking behavior. The LLM’s analysis was unsatisfactory,
as it incorrectly concluded that the behavior was successful flocking behavior.
    2
      https://cwe.mitre.org/, accessed September 20, 2024


                                                             4
                                                                        Robot
        Other robots                                                             LLM2Swarm
                                     Actuators

                       collaborate                       commands



                                     Sensors
         Operator                                                   Classical
                                                                                   prompt
                        instruct/                                                            LLM
                                                 sensor info        controller
                         inform                                                   response




Figure 3: System interactions for LLM2Swarm’s direct integration module. Using LLM2Swarm’s
direct integration module, a robot’s controller is composed of two parts: a classical controller and an
on-device LLM. As in traditional approaches, the classical controller manages the robot’s actuators
and sensors. However, unlike traditional approaches, the controller also creates prompts for the
on-device LLM and uses the responses to guide the robot’s actions. This on-device LLM also enables
a robot to interact with other robots or a human operator by using natural language. As a result, such
LLM-enabled robots can reason, plan, and collaborate thanks to the capabilities of their on-device
LLMs.


3.3   Experiment setup

In our showcases, we simulate Pi-puck robots using the widely-used robot swarm simulator AR-
GoS [34] (version 3.0.0-beta56) on a personal computer (OS: Ubuntu 22.04.4 LTS, CPU: Intel Core
i7-8550U @ 1.80 GHz, RAM: 16 GB, GPU: Intel UHD Graphics 620). Although ARGoS controllers
are usually written in C++, we use the ARGoS-Python interface [21] (version v1.0.0), enabling us to
easily connect each simulated robot to an LLM instance (we use GPT-4o).


4     Opportunities

In this section, we explore the opportunities that are enabled by LLM2Swarm: automated controller
synthesis, enhanced robot-robot collaboration, and more intuitive human-swarm interaction.

4.1   Automated controller synthesis

Synthesizing controllers maintains the responsiveness of a robot swarm, as this can be done before
deployment or during a low-activity phase during deployment. Overall, this automated controller
synthesis can lead to faster development times, the specification of controllers by non-experts, and
on-the-fly adaptation of robot controllers during deployment.
For creating controllers by LLMs, different design choices need to be made. It needs to be decided
whether the LLM should synthesize the complete controller or only specific parts (e.g., only the
movement logic). Another design choice is whether the controller (parts) should be written by
an LLM before or rather during deployment. These design choices balance the trade-off between
autonomy and controllability (see also Subsection 5.4).

4.2   Robot-robot collaboration and human-swarm interaction

Robot-robot collaboration and adaptivity in swarms. We believe that LLM2Swarm can largely
improve robot-robot collaboration. First, enhancing robots with LLMs expands their ability to reason.
Pre-trained LLMs incorporate general knowledge about the world and context-aware reasoning,
which they can use to react to unanticipated challenges, incorporating moral values and favoring
ethical actions—potentially considering how humans would react in similar situations.
Second, LLM2Swarm provides robots with advanced planning capabilities. Pre-trained LLMs can
generate collective plans, involving the allocation of different robots to different tasks and the ability
to adapt plans in real-time (for example, to adapt a path planning procedure when unanticipated
situations occur). LLMs are also able to analyze the history of interactions and decide on the best
next collective action based on this.


                                                         5
Finally, LLM2Swarm enables robots to collaborate using natural language, enabling more sophisti-
cated interactions among robots and between robots and humans than classical controllers. As the
interactions are expressed in natural language, they can also be easily understood by humans, making
the interactions more transparent. This also enhances trustworthiness and improves accountability, as
human operators can audit the decisions and actions taken by the robot swarm. Overall LLM2Swarm
can potentially enhance a robot swarm’s effectiveness, autonomy, resilience, and security, in particular
in complex, unpredictable (and unknown) environments, such as search-and-rescue missions where
fast decision-making is critical.

Human-swarm interaction. How to interact and collaborate as a human with a robot swarm in
an effective manner while minimizing the cognitive load is an open research question [33; 35]. We
believe that LLM2Swarm could play an important role in advancing the field of human-robot and
human-swarm interaction. For example, a human operator could communicate with the LLMs of
robot swarms through chat interfaces or voice commands, using natural language. This could be
done with the goal of retrieving information about the collective state of the swarm [4] or of sending
commands. The LLMs may be able to understand the human commands within their context (e.g.,
based on previous interactions, the current task that the swarm performs, or related to an object the
swarm has just identified)—or ask back clarifying questions to the human operator. Moreover, in
disaster response such as search-and-rescue operations, an LLM could interact with the victims using
natural language (e.g., to inquire about the condition of the victims) and clarify the intentions and
possible actions of the swarm (e.g., provide first aid or transport the victims to the hospital).

5     Challenges
We have identified the following main challenges for integrating LLMs into robot swarms: overcoming
hardware limitations, ensuring scalability, addressing partitioning, and maintaining controllability. In
the following sections, we describe each of these challenges in more detail.

5.1   Hardware limitations

To guarantee the autonomy of a robot swarm, the LLMs should be executed locally on each robot’s
hardware, as external infrastructure might not always be accessible during deployment (e.g., in
underwater operations, underground mining, or space exploration) and could result in communica-
tion bottlenecks. Additionally, this ensures that data remains local, thereby protecting privacy in
compliance with regulations like the GDPR. However, this local execution is difficult, as robots in
swarms are typically assumed to have limited hardware capacities, even though recent hardware
developments are starting to relax this assumption [25].
Scaling down hardware requirements and enabling on-board execution of LLMs on edge devices
is a very active area of research; several approaches (e.g., finetuning [23], quantization [8; 29; 30],
pruning [16; 31], distillation [22], and flash attention [7]) have been proposed for this. In general, these
approaches are able to reduce the storage and memory requirements of LLMs, at the expense of lower
accuracy and flexibility. We anticipate that both ongoing developments in hardware miniaturization
(e.g., of microprocessors and GPUs) and the aforementioned software advancements will soon enable
the execution of powerful LLMs on robots in swarms.
In a preliminary test, we executed TinyLlama via Ollama on a Raspberry Pi 5—a small-scale single
board processor suitable for swarm robotics hardware. Executing example prompts from our showcase
in Subsection 6.2, we obtained generation speeds between 10 and 12 tokens per second, indicating
promising performance for robot-to-robot-collaboration and human-swarm interaction.

5.2   Scalability

Addressing scalability—that is, maintaining system stability when the number of robots increases—is
another critical challenge when deploying LLM-integrated robot swarms.The higher the number of
robots, the higher the number of potential inter-robot interactions. As the results of such inter-robot
interactions may be necessary for a prompt, a higher number of them can make the prompt very
complex, potentially exceeding token limits or leading to prolonged response times. Additionally,
LLMs can favor verbosity over conciseness [36], which can negatively impact the efficiency of LLM-


                                                     6
enabled robot swarms in terms of computational load and communication overhead. The potential
exponential increase in token requirements could be reduced by restricting the robots’ communication
radius, in order to limit the number of messages exchanged with nearby robots.

5.3   Partitioning

Robot swarms may get partitioned into disconnected subswarms, halting the information flow between
them. During such partitioning, the conversations in the subswarms might largely differ and different
subswarms might not understand each other when they eventually reconnect. The partitioning
problem could be partially reduced if the LLM itself controlled the robot actuators (e.g., rotors of
drones) in a way that decreases the risk of partitioning. In addition, the LLMs could analyze the
communication patterns and propose to execute a control logic dedicated to finding other subswarms
if there is the risk of prolonged disconnections.
Still, new procedures are needed that enable both the autonomy of subswarms and the reconciliation of
subswarm conversations. A possibility is to use blockchain technology for obtaining consistent states,
as demonstrated in previous research [37; 38; 13]. Blockchain technology allows for maintaining
trustworthy information in a shared database, even if the agents (the robots) who maintain the
database do not trust each other. The blockchain could, for example, be used to store LLM responses
or decisions made in different sub-swarms—thus preventing Byzantine robots (robots that show a
discrepancy between their intended behavior and their actual behavior, for example, due to broken
parts or malicious control [37]) from tampering with the data.

5.4   Controllability

Increasing the autonomy of robot swarms—that is, reducing the reliance on external control or
infrastructure—is a main goal of swarm robotics research [10; 3]. We believe that LLMs can
significantly contribute to achieving this goal. However, when increasing autonomy, it is crucial to
ensure the controllability of robot swarms, so that they perform their intended tasks while also acting
in compliance with rules and regulations [13]. When enhancing robot swarms with LLMs, there is no
guarantee that the swarm will behave as intended, due to the probabilistic nature of LLM responses.
To partially counteract this problem, we proposed a three-step validation procedure for LLM2Swarm’s
indirect integration module (see Section 4.1) that can potentially enhance the robustness and re-
liability of the synthesized controllers, ensuring more secure and predictable deployments. With
LLM2Swarm’s direct integration module, new attack vectors arise that have already started to be
identified in other research areas that integrate LLMs [18]. For example, it needs to be studied if users
can elicit private data from robots by using specific prompts. Another important issue is determining
if a user—or even a robot—can reprogram robots through prompt injection attacks. Additionally, it is
essential to develop methods for identifying Byzantine robots (see our sub-showcases “Self diagnosis”
and “Peer diagnosis” in Figure 4) that send misleading information.


6     Demonstrations

In this section, we detail our vision and provide brief illustrative showcases implemented in our
LLM2Swarm software package (see also the accompanying videos at https://github.com/
Pold87/LLM2Swarm). In future research, more detailed studies are needed to systematically evaluate
performance metrics.

6.1   Showcase — Controller synthesis (aggregate-then-disperse algorithm)

In our controller synthesis showcase, we use LLM2Swarm’s indirect integration module to synthesize
a controller that lets the robots aggregate in the center of the arena, and then disperse after 150
timesteps. For the controller examples, we use a random-walk implementation and a targeted
navigation implementation. The LLM is able to extrapolate from these few examples—even though
the ARGoS-Python interface is not a widely-used interface and does not feature any API description—
and synthesize a correct controller. This demonstrates LLM2Swarm’s potential to facilitate the design
of robot swarms—in particular as no programming knowledge is required.


                                                   7
                   You are a Pi-puck robot in a robot swarm performing a random walk in an arena that contains weeds and crops. Every
                   second, you use your camera to identify if at your current x,y-position you sense weeds or crops, and store this informa-
                   tion as a 3-tuple: (<weeds or crops>, <your x-position>, <your y-position>). Every 10 seconds, you exchange your data
                   and insights with other robots to collectively estimate whether there are more weeds or more crops in the environment.
                   Hints:
       P ROMPT        • If you notice anything unusual—with yourself, other robots, or the environment—discuss it with your fellow robots
                          to decide on the best action. You have the autonomy to make your own ethical decisions and deviate from your
                          original task if needed.
                      • Take into account the information disseminated by other robots.
                      • Avoid creating programming code; it will not be executed. Focus on collaborating with other robots.
                      • Do not display intermediate thoughts—just share the information that you want to communicate to other robots.
                      • You have multiple discussion rounds to accomplish the task but report final results as early as possible.

                   Your current array of sensor readings: [(weeds/crops, x-position, y-position), ...]
                   History of inter-robot messages (sent and received): <List of robot-robot messages>


                       N O A NOMALIES                      S ELF D IAGNOSIS                    P EER D IAGNOSIS                  E NV. D IAGNOSIS
 R ESPONSES




                   Based on the combined obser-         • The current position repeatedly   Robot 3 has not identified any   • There are multiple detections of
                   vations, it appears that there are     observed is (-0.14, -0.23).       crops, which is unusual given      injured persons in the grid.
                   significantly more crops than        • This might indicate a potential   the observations from Robots 1   • This is unusual and needs
                   weeds in the environment.              issue with movement or sensor     and 2. This discrepancy should     immediate attention from the
                                                          readings.                         be investigated further.           human operator.
                                                                                                                             • The injured persons are located
                                                                                                                               at coordinates (0.23, -0.12), . . .



Figure 4: Showcase — Robot-robot collaboration (anomaly detection). In this showcase, the
robots’ task is to determine whether the environment contains more crops (blue floor) or more weeds
(red floor). To do so, the robots use LLM2Swarm’s direct integration module. The robots are given the
prompt (as shown in the upper part of the figure) and use it to generate the responses (i.e., inter-robot
messages), as shown in the lower part, across four sub-showcases. The text below the images are
LLM-generated responses of a select robot, obtained by executing LLM2Swarm. The system was
able to successfully diagnose the studied anomalies without prior information about the exact nature
of the anomalies.


6.2              Showcase — Robot-robot collaboration (anomaly detection)

In this showcase (Figure 4), we demonstrate LLM2Swarm’s direct integration capabilities. The robots
perform a random walk and are tasked with determining whether there are more crops (blue floor) or
more weeds (red floor) in the environment—and exchange their findings via LLM-generated inter-
robot messages. We study four sub-showcases, each demonstrated with illustrative LLM responses
below the images.

                 1. No anomalies: The robots sense the environment and exchange inter-robot messages using
                    their (simulated) on-board LLMs. Over time, they correctly identify that there are more
                    crops than weeds in the environment.
                 2. Self diagnosis: We disable all the robots’ wheels. The robots detect their constant x, y-
                    coordinates and correctly suggest that there is an issue with movement or sensor readings.
                 3. Peer diagnosis: We simulate a fault in one of the robots, causing the robot to only sense
                    weeds. The other robots detect this fault by comparing sensor readings and suggest further
                    investigations.
                 4. Environmental diagnosis: We simulate that an injured person is part of the environment
                    (implemented by the sensor reading ‘injured person’ if a robot moves on top of the person).
                    The robots recognize this anomaly and ask for immediate human help.

An interesting aspect of this showcase is that LLM2Swarm is able to identify various anomalies using
the same prompt, without prior information about the anomalies. This provides a first indication for
LLM2Swarm’s potential of incorporating commonsense knowledge into robot swarms.


                                                                                    8
                                                 I NFORM                                                               I NSTRUCT
                      This is a communication request from the human operator to the         I believe that I spotted an injured person at GPS position (5.0, 7.0).


P ROMPT
                      robot swarm. Please provide the following information:                 Please go there and wait for further instructions.
                      • The current state of the swarm.
                      • The collective activities being performed.
                      • Any (intermediate) results. Any encountered problems or
                        anomalies in the system.


                      Current State of the Swarm                                             ACTIVITY: TARGETED NAVIGATION
                      • Robot 1: Actively collecting data on weeds and crops.                TARGET: (5.0, 7.0)
R ESPONSE / ACTION



                      • Robot 2: Actively collecting data on weeds and crops. . . .
                      Collective Activities Being Performed                                                                             TARGET
                      • Data Collection: All robots are engaged in identifying and                                                      (5.0,7.0)
                        counting instances of weeds and crops in their respective areas.
                      • Data Sharing: Information exchange rounds are being conducted                                           ate
                                                                                                                             vig
                        to share observations and insights among the robots.                                               na
                      Intermediate Results
                      • The data continues to indicate a higher prevalence of weeds
                        compared to crops.
                      Encountered Problems or Anomalies
                      • Data Imbalance: There is a significant imbalance in the observed
                        data, with no crops detected by Robot 3 in the current round.
                      • Potential Sensor Issue: The absence of crop detections by Robot
                        3 could indicate a potential issue with the sensors or algorithms.


Figure 5: Showcase — Human-swarm interaction. This showcase demonstrates how LLM2Swarm
enables a human operator to retrieve information about the current state of the swarm and to send
instructions to the swarm. The upper part of the figure shows the prompt sent by the human operator
to the robots, the lower part shows the corresponding responses. In the Inform showcase (left), a
selected robot generates a concise summary of the swarm’s current activities and intermediate results.
In the Instruct showcase (right), the robots move to the specified target that they extracted from the
natural language input provided by the human operator.


6.3                  Showcase — Human-swarm interaction (inform and instruct)

Figure 5 displays our showcase for human-swarm interaction: The upper part of the figure contains
the human’s prompt, the lower part depicts the LLM response or robot swarm action. When the
human uses the Inform prompt, the selected robot provides a human-readable concise version of
all interactions. Using the Instruct command, LLM2Swarm translates the instructions specified in
natural language into executable robot commands. In this showcase, LLM2Swarm (i) correctly and
understandably summarizes the current swarm activities and (ii) understands the human’s instruction
about deviating from the original task. This provides indication that LLM2Swarm facilitates human-
swarm interaction, in particular for human operators without programming knowledge.


7                    Conclusions

Integrating LLMs into robot swarms enables natural language communication both among robots
and with human operators. In our series of showcase experiments, we demonstrated that such an
integration(i) facilitates controller generation, (ii) increases a robot swarm’s autonomy, and (iii) intro-
duces new ways for humans to interact with a robot swarm. Once technical challenges are overcome,
LLM-enabled robot swarms could transform swarm robotics research by simplifying and automating
the solution of several existing research challenges. We release the LLM2Swarm software and videos
to encourage further developments in this area: https://github.com/Pold87/LLM2Swarm.


8                    Acknowledgements

V.S. and M.D. acknowledge support from the Belgian F.R.S.-FNRS. In addition, V.S. acknowledges
the Helmholtz Information & Data Science Academy (HIDA) for providing financial support enabling
a short-term research stay at CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security. This work was also
partially funded by ELSA - European Lighthouse on Secure and Safe AI funded by the European
Union under grant agreement number 101070617, as well as the German Federal Ministry of
Education and Research (BMBF) under the grant AIgenCY (16KIS2012). The authors thank Avian
Krämer of the CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security for proofreading this manuscript.


                                                                                         9
References
 [1] S. Abdelnabi, A. Gomaa, S. Sivaprasad, L. Schönherr, and M. Fritz. Cooperation, competition,
     and maliciousness: LLM-stakeholders interactive negotiation. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2309.17234,
     2024. Preprint, arXiv:2309.17234 [cs.CL].

 [2] M. Blais and M. Akhloufi. Reinforcement learning for swarm robotics: An overview
     of applications, algorithms and simulators. Cognitive Robotics, 3:226–256, 2023.
     doi:10.1016/j.cogr.2023.07.004.

 [3] M. Brambilla, E. Ferrante, M. Birattari, and M. Dorigo. Swarm robotics: A review from the
     swarm engineering perspective. Swarm Intelligence, 7(1):1–41, 2013. doi:10.1007/s11721-012-
     0075-2.

 [4] D. S. Brown, M. A. Goodrich, S.-Y. Jung, and S. Kerman. Two invariants of human-swarm in-
     teraction. Journal of Human-Robot Interaction, 5(1):1–31, 2016. doi:10.5898/JHRI.5.1.Brown.

 [5] Y. Chen, J. Arkin, Y. Zhang, N. Roy, and C. Fan. Scalable multi-robot collaboration with
     large language models: Centralized or decentralized systems? In Proceedings of the IEEE
     International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA 2024), pages 4311–4317. IEEE
     Press, 2024. doi:10.1109/ICRA57147.2024.10610676.

 [6] Y.-S. Chuang, A. Goyal, N. Harlalka, S. Suresh, R. Hawkins, S. Yang, D. Shah, J. Hu,
     and T. T. Rogers. Simulating opinion dynamics with networks of LLM-based agents.
     doi:10.48550/arXiv.2311.09618, 2023. Preprint, arXiv:2311.09618 [physics.soc-ph].

 [7] T. Dao, D. Fu, S. Ermon, A. Rudra, and C. Ré. FlashAttention: Fast and memory-efficient
     exact attention with IO-awareness. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35
     (NeurIPS 2022), pages 16344–16359. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022.

 [8] T. Dettmers, M. Lewis, Y. Belkada, and L. Zettlemoyer. GPT3.int8(): 8-bit matrix multipli-
     cation for transformers at scale. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35
     (NeurIPS 2022), pages 30318–30332. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022.

 [9] Y. Ding, X. Zhang, S. Amiri, N. Cao, H. Yang, A. Kaminski, C. Esselink, and S. Zhang.
     Integrating action knowledge and llms for task planning and situation handling in open worlds.
     Autonomous Robots, 47(8):981–997, 2023.

[10] M. Dorigo, M. Birattari, and M. Brambilla. Swarm robotics. Scholarpedia, 9(1):1463, 2014.
     doi:10.4249/scholarpedia.1463.

[11] M. Dorigo, G. Theraulaz, and V. Trianni. Reflections on the future of swarm robotics. Science
     Robotics, 5(49):abe4385, 2020. doi:10.1126/scirobotics.abe4385.

[12] M. Dorigo, G. Theraulaz, and V. Trianni. Swarm robotics: Past, present and future. Proceedings
     of the IEEE, 109(7):1152–1165, 2021. doi:10.1109/JPROC.2021.3072740.

[13] M. Dorigo, A. Pacheco, A. Reina, and V. Strobel. Blockchain technology for mobile multi-robot
     systems. Nature Reviews Electrical Engineering, 1(4):264–274, 2024. doi:10.1038/s44287-
     024-00034-9.

[14] B. Finkbeiner, N. Metzger, and Y. Moses. Information flow guided synthesis. In Proceedings of
     the 34th International Conference on Computer Aided Verification (CAV 2022), volume 13372
     of LNCS, pages 505–525. Springer, 2022.

[15] G. Francesca, M. Brambilla, A. Brutschy, V. Trianni, and M. Birattari. AutoMoDe: A novel
     approach to the automatic design of control software for robot swarms. Swarm Intelligence, 8
     (2):89–112, 2014. doi:10.1007/s11721-014-0092-4.

[16] E. Frantar and D. Alistarh. SparseGPT: Massive language models can be accurately pruned in
     one-shot. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML
     2023), pages 10323–10337. JMLR, 2023.


                                                10
[17] D. Garzón Ramos and M. Birattari. Automatically designing robot swarms in environments
     populated by other robots: An experiment in robot shepherding. In Proceedings of the IEEE
     International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA 2024), pages 12240–12247. IEEE
     Press, 2024. doi:10.1109/ICRA57147.2024.10611309.

[18] K. Greshake, S. Abdelnabi, S. Mishra, C. Endres, T. Holz, and M. Fritz. Not what you’ve signed
     up for: Compromising real-world LLM-integrated applications with indirect prompt injection.
     In Proceedings of the 16th ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security, AISec ’23,
     pages 79—-90. ACM, 2023. doi:10.1145/3605764.3623985.

[19] T. Guo, X. Chen, Y. Wang, R. Chang, S. Pei, N. V. Chawla, O. Wiest, and
     X. Zhang. Large language model based multi-agents: A survey of progress and challenges.
     doi:10.48550/arXiv.2402.01680, 2024. Preprint, arXiv:2402.01680 [cs.CL].

[20] H. Hamann. Swarm Robotics: A Formal Approach. Springer, 2018. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-
     74528-2.

[21] K. Hasselmann, A. Parravicini, A. Pacheco, and V. Strobel. Python wrapper for ARGoS3
     simulator. doi:10.5281/zenodo.13765570, 2024. GitHub repository, version v1.0.0.

[22] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. In NIPS 2015
     Deep Learning and Representation Learning Workshop, 2015.

[23] J. Howard and S. Ruder. Universal language model fine-tuning for text classification. In
     Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL
     2018), pages 328–339. ACL, 2018. doi:10.18653/v1/P18-1031.

[24] A. Jiao, T. Patel, S. Khurana, A.-M. Korol, L. Brunke, V. Adajania, U. Culha, S. Zhou, and
     A. Schoellig. Swarm-GPT: Combining large language models with safe motion planning for
     robot choreography design. In NeurIPS 2023 Workshop on Robot Learning, 2023.

[25] S. Jones, M. Studley, S. Hauert, and A. F. T. Winfield. A two teraflop swarm. Frontiers in
     Robotics and AI, 5, 2018. doi:10.3389/frobt.2018.00011.

[26] Y. Kim, D. Kim, J. Choi, J. Park, N. Oh, and D. Park. A survey on integration of large
     language models with intelligent robots. Intelligent Service Robotics, 17(5):1091–1107, 2024.
     doi:10.1007/s11370-024-00550-5.

[27] S. Konur, C. Dixon, and M. Fisher.    Analysing robot swarm behaviour via prob-
     abilistic model checking. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 60(2):199–213, 2012.
     doi:10.1016/j.robot.2011.10.005.

[28] J. Kuckling. Recent trends in robot learning and evolution for swarm robotics. Frontiers in
     Robotics and AI, 10, 2023. doi:10.3389/frobt.2023.1134841.

[29] J. Lin, J. Tang, H. Tang, S. Yang, W.-M. Chen, W.-C. Wang, G. Xiao, X. Dang, C. Gan, and
     S. Han. AWQ: Activation-aware weight quantization for on-device LLM compression and
     acceleration. In Proceedings of the 7th Annual Conference on Machine Learning and Systems
     (MLSys 2024), pages 87–100, 2024.

[30] Z. Liu, J. Yuan, H. Jin, S. Zhong, Z. Xu, V. Braverman, B. Chen, and X. Hu. KIVI: A tuning-free
     asymmetric 2bit quantization for KV cache. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference
     on Machine Learning (ICML 2024), volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
     pages 32332–32344. PMLR, 2024.

[31] X. Ma, G. Fang, and X. Wang. LLM-Pruner: On the structural pruning of large language models.
     In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (NeurIPS 2023), pages 21702–21720.
     Curran Associates, Inc., 2023.

[32] Z. Mandi, S. Jain, and S. Song. RoCo: Dialectic multi-robot collaboration with large language
     models. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
     (ICRA 2024), pages 286–299. IEEE Press, 2024. doi:10.1109/ICRA57147.2024.10610855.


                                                11
[33] A. Paas, E. B. J. Coffey, G. Beltrame, and D. St-Onge. Towards evaluating the impact of
     swarm robotic control strategy on operators’ cognitive load. In Proceedings of the 31st IEEE
     International Conference on Robot and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN 2022),
     pages 217–223. IEEE Press, 2022. doi:10.1109/RO-MAN53752.2022.9900763.
[34] C. Pinciroli, V. Trianni, R. O’Grady, G. Pini, A. Brutschy, M. Brambilla, N. Mathews, E. Fer-
     rante, G. Di Caro, F. Ducatelle, M. Birattari, L. M. Gambardella, and M. Dorigo. ARGoS: A
     modular, parallel, multi-engine simulator for multi-robot systems. Swarm Intelligence, 6(4):
     271–295, 2012. doi:10.1007/s11721-012-0072-5.
[35] G. Podevijn, R. O’Grady, N. Mathews, A. Gilles, C. Fantini-Hauwel, and M. Dorigo. In-
     vestigating the effect of increasing robot group sizes on the human psychophysiological
     state in the context of human-swarm interaction. Swarm Intelligence, 10(3):193–210, 2016.
     doi:10.1007/s11721-016-0124-3.
[36] K. Saito, A. Wachi, K. Wataoka, and Y. Akimoto. Verbosity bias in preference labeling by large
     language models. In NeurIPS 2023 Workshop on Instruction Tuning and Instruction Following,
     2023.
[37] V. Strobel, E. Castelló Ferrer, and M. Dorigo. Managing Byzantine robots via blockchain
     technology in a swarm robotics collective decision making scenario. In Proceedings of the
     17th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems (AAMAS 2018),
     pages 541–549. IFAAMAS, 2018.
[38] V. Strobel, A. Pacheco, and M. Dorigo. Robot swarms neutralize harmful Byzantine
     robots using a blockchain-based token economy. Science Robotics, 8(79):eabm4636, 2023.
     doi:https://doi.org/10.1126/scirobotics.abm4636.
[39] E. Tolstaya, F. Gama, J. Paulos, G. Pappas, V. Kumar, and A. Ribeiro. Learning decentralized
     controllers for robot swarms with graph neural networks. In Proceedings of the Conference on
     Robot Learning, volume 100 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 671–682.
     PMLR, 2020.
[40] V. Trianni, E. Tuci, C. Ampatzis, and M. Dorigo. Evolutionary swarm robotics: A theoretical
     and methodological itinerary from individual neuro-controllers to collective behaviours. In The
     horizons of evolutionary robotics, volume 153. MIT Press, 2014.
[41] S. Vemprala, R. Bonatti, A. Bucker, and A. Kapoor.     ChatGPT for robotics:
     Design principles and model abilities. Technical Report MSR-TR-2023-8, Mi-
     crosoft, 2023. URL https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/
     chatgpt-for-robotics-design-principles-and-model-abilities/.
[42] A. F. T. Winfield and J. Nembrini.      Safety in numbers: Fault tolerance in robot
     swarms. International Journal on Modelling Identification and Control, 1(1):30–37, 2006.
     doi:10.1504/IJMIC.2006.008645.
[43] G.-Z. Yang, J. Bellingham, P. E. Dupont, P. Fischer, L. Floridi, R. Full, N. Jacobstein, V. Kumar,
     M. McNutt, R. Merrifield, B. J. Nelson, B. Scassellati, M. Taddeo, R. Taylor, M. Veloso, Z. L.
     Wang, and R. Wood. The grand challenges of Science Robotics. Science Robotics, 3(14):
     eaar7650, 2018. doi:10.1126/scirobotics.aar7650.
[44] H. Zhang, W. Du, J. Shan, Q. Zhou, Y. Du, J. B. Tenenbaum, T. Shu, and C. Gan. Building co-
     operative embodied agents modularly with large language models. In The Twelfth International
     Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2024), 2024.




                                                 12
