                                        D ISCOVERY B ENCH: Towards Data-Driven Discovery
                                                  with Large Language Models


                                                   Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder∗1 Harshit Surana∗12 Dhruv Agarwal∗3
                                                Bhavana Dalvi Mishra∗1 Abhijeetsingh Meena2 Aryan Prakhar2 Tirth Vora2
                                                                 Tushar Khot1 Ashish Sabharwal1 Peter Clark1
                                                   1
                                                     Allen Institute for AI 2 OpenLocus 3 University of Massachusetts Amherst
arXiv:2407.01725v1 [cs.CL] 1 Jul 2024




                                                            Website: https://github.com/allenai/discoverybench
                                                          https://huggingface.co/datasets/allenai/discoverybench
                                                                              ∗
                                                                                equal contributions



                                                                                          Abstract

                                                   Can the rapid advances in code generation, function calling, and data analysis
                                                   using large language models (LLMs) help automate the search and verification of
                                                   hypotheses purely from a set of provided datasets? To evaluate this question, we
                                                   present D ISCOVERY B ENCH, the first comprehensive benchmark that formalizes
                                                   the multi-step process of data-driven discovery. The benchmark is designed to
                                                   systematically assess current model capabilities in discovery tasks and provide a
                                                   useful resource for improving them. Our benchmark contains 264 tasks collected
                                                   across 6 diverse domains, such as sociology and engineering, by manually deriving
                                                   discovery workflows from published papers to approximate the real-world chal-
                                                   lenges faced by researchers, where each task is defined by a dataset, its metadata,
                                                   and a discovery goal in natural language. We additionally provide 903 synthetic
                                                   tasks to conduct controlled evaluations across task complexity. Furthermore, our
                                                   structured formalism of data-driven discovery enables a facet-based evaluation that
                                                   provides useful insights into different failure modes. We evaluate several popular
                                                   LLM-based reasoning frameworks using both open and closed LLMs as baselines
                                                   on D ISCOVERY B ENCH and find that even the best system scores only 25%. Our
                                                   benchmark, thus, illustrates the challenges in autonomous data-driven discovery
                                                   and serves as a valuable resource for the community to make progress.


                                        1       Introduction

                                        Knowledge discovery via the scientific process has been a catalyst for human progress for centuries
                                        but has, thus far, been a predominantly manual pursuit [16]. Recent breakthroughs in capabilities of
                                        large language models (LLMs) to reason and interface with the world using code [9, 40], external tools
                                        [41], and interactive agents [51, 32], however, now suggest the possibility of realizing a discovery
                                        system that is fully autonomous. Indeed, recent works [33] provide initial evidence for this paradigm
                                        within the setting of data-driven discovery, where both search and verification of hypotheses may be
                                        carried out using a dataset alone (i.e., after physical experiments and data collection1 ), but the extent
                                        of this ability remains unclear. We, therefore, aim to systematically evaluate the following question:
                                                   How good are current state-of-the-art LLMs at automated data-driven discovery?

                                            1
                                             In practice, experiments and analysis are interleaved, not sequential. Our concern in this work, however, is
                                        systematically studying the data analysis part of the (interleaved) pipeline.


                                        Preprint. Under review.
Dat aset :                                                        Workflow:
 habit at   nonnat ive nonnat ive nonnat ive                      1. Filter for habitat type: urban                                             gold      predict ed    score
                                                 elevat ion ...
  t ype     gardening unint ent ional agriforest                  2. GLM with a binomial outcome and a logit function                          urban        urban
croplands       5             0            2         675          to model binary data                                        cont ext                                    1.0
                                                                                                                                            habitat type habitat type
 wetlands       0             4            1         88           3. Check spatial autocorrelation among data points
                                                                  using Moran's I-statistic with PySAL                                       gardening, gardening,
    urban       2             1            0         329                                                                      variable                                    0.3
                                                                  4. Use statsmodels.stats.diagnostic to assess model ...                   unintentional agriforst
      ...       ...           ...          ...        ...
                                                                                                                            relat ionship     reduced     increased       0.0
Goal: How did urban land use affect the                           Final Answer: Urban land use increased
invasion of different types of introduced                         invasion by agriforest plants over gardening
                                                                  introduced ones in Catalonia.                                               Final Score: 0.21
plants in Catalonia?
            DiscoveryBench Task                                     Discovery Agent W orkflow                                                 Evaluat ion

Figure 1: Each D ISCOVERY B ENCH task consists of a goal and dataset(s) (left). Solving the task requires both
statistical analysis and scientific semantic reasoning, e.g., deciding which analysis is appropriate for the domain,
and mapping goal terms to column names (center). A faceted evaluation allows open-ended final answers to be
rigorously evaluated (right).


Answering this question is hard, as data-driven discovery in the wild (real-world) is diverse across
domains and subject areas, which in turn makes it difficult to build a robust evaluation framework to
measure progress. We address this using a pragmatic formalization of data-driven discovery, namely
the search for a relationship that may hold between variables in a context, where (importantly) the
description of those facets may not be in the language of the dataset. A data-driven discovery task
then has one of these components missing, e.g., “How did urban land use affect the invasion of
introduced plants in Catalonia?". Importantly, this formalization allows for systematic, reproducible
evaluation over a wide variety of real-world problems, by leveraging these facets (Fig 1, right).
Unlike prior datasets for statistical analysis [28] or AutoML [55, 15], D ISCOVERY B ENCH tasks also
require scientific semantic reasoning, for instance, deciding which of the many possible analysis
techniques are appropriate for the domain (e.g., spatial autocorrelation for plant invasion, Fig 1
center), how to clean and/or normalize the data, and how to map goal terms to dataset terms (e.g.,
“land use” to “habitat type”). Task solutions typically requires a multistep workflow (Fig 1, center).
In this way, D ISCOVERY B ENCH is the first large-scale dataset to address the broader data-driven
discovery pipeline, not just the statistical analysis component, and explore LLMs’ capacity for this.
Given this framework, we created D ISCOVERY B ENCH by manually extracting 264 discovery tasks,
i.e., goal + dataset(s), from over 20 published papers, as well as creating real-world discovery
workflows that solve each task. We additionally provide 903 synthetic tasks across 48 domains
generated using LLMs to mimic the real-world discovery process. The synthetic benchmark allows
us to conduct controlled model evaluations by varying task difficulty. Our contributions are thus:
• D ISCOVERY B ENCH, the first comprehensive benchmark to formalize the multi-step process of
  data-driven hypothesis search and verification, covering many real-world discovery tasks plus
  additional synthetic tasks.
• A pragmatic formalism for data-driven discovery, flexible enough to characterize many real-world
  tasks while constrained enough to allow for rigorous, reproducible evaluation.
• A comprehensive evaluation across state-of-the-art LLM-based reasoning methods (“discovery
  agents”). We find performance peaks at 25%, demonstrating the challenging nature of our task.

These suggest that D ISCOVERY B ENCH may be a valuable resource for helping make progress on
autonomous, data-driven discovery.

2       Related Work
Automated data-driven discovery has been a long-standing dream of AI [33, 21]. Although there
have been a range of data-driven discovery systems, from early ones that fit equations to idealized
data, e.g., Bacon [23], to more modern ones handling complex real-world problems, e.g., AlphaFold
[19], their associated datasets are task-specific and customized to a pre-built pipeline. In contrast,
D ISCOVERY B ENCH aims to be a general test over multiple tasks, including testing whether systems
can design appropriate pipelines themselves.
A number of datasets and tools are available for AutoML, a related technology aimed at automating
workflows for building optimal machine learning models [18, 55, 24]. AutoML tools include packages
like Scikit [13], and embedded in cloud platforms such as Google Cloud Platform, Microsoft Azure,


                                                                                          2
and Amazon Web Services. However, associated datasets for AutoML are primarily used for training
models, rather than for open-ended discovery tasks.
Similarly, there are several datasets that test statistical analysis in various fields, e.g., [42, 25, 50].
Software packages like Tableaux, SAS, and R also support users in that task. However, these datasets
and tools are designed specifically for data analysis, while D ISCOVERY B ENCH aims to automate
the broader pipeline including ideation, semantic reasoning, and pipeline design, where statistical
analysis is just one component.
One recent dataset similar in spirit to ours is QRData [28]. QRData also explores LLM capabilities
but targets statistical/causal analysis for well-defined (mainly) textbook questions that have unique,
(mainly) numeric gold answers. In contrast, D ISCOVERY B ENCH has no prescribed boundaries on
statistical techniques to apply, uses open-ended questions and answers, and complex tasks drawn
from state-of-the-art published work.

3   Formalization
We begin by formalizing what we mean by a data-driven hypothesis and how the structure of a
complex hypothesis may be viewed as a hypothesis semantic tree.
A data-driven hypothesis h in H (the space of such hypotheses) is a declarative sentence about
the state of the world whose truth value may be inferred from a given dataset D using a verification
procedure VD : H → {supported, unsupported}, for instance, via statistical modeling.
Each hypothesis may further be expressed using a propositional formula ϕ over a set of sub-
hypotheses hi ∈ H using logical connectives, e.g., disjunctions and conjunctions, such that
h := ϕ(h1 , . . . , hn ) and VD (h) = ϕ(VD (h1 ), . . . , VD (hn )). For instance, suppose h is the hy-
pothesis “for men younger than 20, popularity of product A varies proportional to their age (h1 ),
while there exists an inverse relationship for those older than 40 (h2 )”, then h can be expressed as
the conjunction h1 ∧ h2 .
Inspired by recent work of Thompson and Skau [47], we additionally introduce a structured formalism
that breaks a hypothesis down into three hypothesis dimensions:
• Contexts (c): Boundary conditions that limit the scope of a hypothesis. E.g., “for men over the
  age of 30” or “in Asia and Europe” or unbounded/full dataset when not specified.
• Variables (v): Known set of concepts that interact in a meaningful way under a given context to
  produce the hypothesis. E.g., gender, age, or income. Note that each hypothesis is associated
  with a target variable and a set of independent variables.
• Relationships (r): Interactions between a given set of variables under a given context that produces
  the hypothesis. E.g., “quadratic relationship”, “inversely proportional”, or piecewise conditionals.
With slight abuse of notation, we can now equivalently define hypothesis h := ψ(c, v, r), where
ψ(·, ·, ·) returns the declarative sentence “under context c, variables v have relationship r.” For
instance, for sub-hypothesis h1 in our example above, c1 := “men younger than 20”, v1 := {gender,
consumer_age, product_popularity}, and r1 :=“popularity is proportional to age”.
Hypothesis Semantic Tree.           Observe that each
independent variable in a hypothesis may itself be a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           galaxy_visibility
target variable for a prior hypothesis. To emphasize                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Parent Edge


this hierarchical nature, we introduce the concept of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            v0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <latexit sha1_base64="RMMG6llSy+Pde7IL8DhygwnbYwI=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lE1GPRi8eK9gPaUDbbSbt0swm7m0IJ/QlePCji1V/kzX/jts1BWx8MPN6bYWZekAiujet+O4W19Y3NreJ2aWd3b/+gfHjU1HGqGDZYLGLVDqhGwSU2DDcC24lCGgUCW8Hobua3xqg0j+WTmSToR3QgecgZNVZ6HPfcXrniVt05yCrxclKBHPVe+avbj1kaoTRMUK07npsYP6PKcCZwWuqmGhPKRnSAHUsljVD72fzUKTmzSp+EsbIlDZmrvycyGmk9iQLbGVEz1MveTPzP66QmvPEzLpPUoGSLRWEqiInJ7G/S5wqZERNLKFPc3krYkCrKjE2nZEPwll9eJc2LqndVvXy4rNRu8ziKcAKncA4eXEMN7qEODWAwgGd4hTdHOC/Ou/OxaC04+cwx/IHz+QMKDo2m</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ancestor Edge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Target Variable
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Independent Variable
a hypothesis semantic tree whose nodes are variables
(independent or derived) and whose sub-trees repre-
sent hypotheses, as follows. Consider a hypothesis h.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       distance                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            galaxy_color

A semantic hypothesis tree Th with h as the primary            v1
                                                               <latexit sha1_base64="xRFvcCAHe3sdZK6o49MLG0zyJbM=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lE1GPRi8eK9gPaUDbbSbt0swm7m0IJ/QlePCji1V/kzX/jts1BWx8MPN6bYWZekAiujet+O4W19Y3NreJ2aWd3b/+gfHjU1HGqGDZYLGLVDqhGwSU2DDcC24lCGgUCW8Hobua3xqg0j+WTmSToR3QgecgZNVZ6HPe8XrniVt05yCrxclKBHPVe+avbj1kaoTRMUK07npsYP6PKcCZwWuqmGhPKRnSAHUsljVD72fzUKTmzSp+EsbIlDZmrvycyGmk9iQLbGVEz1MveTPzP66QmvPEzLpPUoGSLRWEqiInJ7G/S5wqZERNLKFPc3krYkCrKjE2nZEPwll9eJc2LqndVvXy4rNRu8ziKcAKncA4eXEMN7qEODWAwgGd4hTdHOC/Ou/OxaC04+cwx/IHz+QMLko2n</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   v2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <latexit sha1_base64="pd6CG+fgXjPa9TrI/+SvifD5VxY=">AAAB6nicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYJUY9ELx4xyiOBDZkdemHC7OxmZpaEED7BiweN8eoXefNvHGAPClbSSaWqO91dQSK4Nq777eQ2Nre2d/K7hb39g8Oj4vFJU8epYthgsYhVO6AaBZfYMNwIbCcKaRQIbAWju7nfGqPSPJZPZpKgH9GB5CFn1Fjpcdyr9Iolt+wuQNaJl5ESZKj3il/dfszSCKVhgmrd8dzE+FOqDGcCZ4VuqjGhbEQH2LFU0gi1P12cOiMXVumTMFa2pCEL9ffElEZaT6LAdkbUDPWqNxf/8zqpCW/8KZdJalCy5aIwFcTEZP436XOFzIiJJZQpbm8lbEgVZcamU7AheKsvr5NmpexdlasP1VLtNosjD2dwDpfgwTXU4B7q0AAGA3iGV3hzhPPivDsfy9ack82cwh84nz8NFo2o</latexit>




hypothesis is a Markov tree whose root node is the
target variable of h, each of whose leaf nodes is an
independent variable that is not derived further, and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          galaxy_size                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        galaxy_density
each of whose internal nodes is the target variable
of an intermediate hypothesis. In other words, each                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           v3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <latexit sha1_base64="b2tEeKlWWv/DNO1wXN9nzf05O4M=">AAAB6nicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHaVqEeiF48Y5ZHAhswOvTBhdnYzM0tCCJ/gxYPGePWLvPk3DrAHBSvppFLVne6uIBFcG9f9dnJr6xubW/ntws7u3v5B8fCooeNUMayzWMSqFVCNgkusG24EthKFNAoENoPh3cxvjlBpHssnM07Qj2hf8pAzaqz0OOpedoslt+zOQVaJl5ESZKh1i1+dXszSCKVhgmrd9tzE+BOqDGcCp4VOqjGhbEj72LZU0gi1P5mfOiVnVumRMFa2pCFz9ffEhEZaj6PAdkbUDPSyNxP/89qpCW/8CZdJalCyxaIwFcTEZPY36XGFzIixJZQpbm8lbEAVZcamU7AheMsvr5LGRdm7KlceKqXqbRZHHk7gFM7Bg2uowj3UoA4M+vAMr/DmCOfFeXc+Fq05J5s5hj9wPn8ADpqNqQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     v4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <latexit sha1_base64="hO320iBa8sEmbXNNilQxEqLdr0Y=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ34WetX1aOXxSJ4KokU9Vj04rGi/YA2lM120y7dbMLupFBCf4IXD4p49Rd589+4bXPQ1gcDj/dmmJkXJFIYdN1vZ219Y3Nru7BT3N3bPzgsHR03TZxqxhsslrFuB9RwKRRvoEDJ24nmNAokbwWju5nfGnNtRKyecJJwP6IDJULBKFrpcdyr9kplt+LOQVaJl5My5Kj3Sl/dfszSiCtkkhrT8dwE/YxqFEzyabGbGp5QNqID3rFU0YgbP5ufOiXnVumTMNa2FJK5+nsio5ExkyiwnRHFoVn2ZuJ/XifF8MbPhEpS5IotFoWpJBiT2d+kLzRnKCeWUKaFvZWwIdWUoU2naEPwll9eJc3LindVqT5Uy7XbPI4CnMIZXIAH11CDe6hDAxgM4Ble4c2Rzovz7nwsWtecfOYE/sD5/AEQHo2q</latexit>




sub-tree Th′ rooted at an internal node v of Th is itself
a hypothesis semantic tree for a hypothesis h′ with v
as the target variable. In particular, a sub-tree rooted       Figure 2: Hypothesis Semantic Tree


                                                     3
at v and all its immediate children Cv implicitly encodes h′ as ψ(c, {v} ∪ Cv , r) where r is the
relationship between v and Cv under context c as specified in h′ . More generally, Th can encode
many different hypotheses by choosing one node as the target variable and considering nodes at
arbitrary descendant levels as independent variables.
For instance, in Fig 2, we show a semantic tree Th with the following primary hypothesis (h): “The
visibility of a galaxy reduces when the blue spectrum dominates and the distance of the galaxy from
Earth increases”, where galaxy_visibility (v0 ) is the target variable with independent variables
distance (v1 ) and galaxy_color (v2 ). Consider now the sub-tree rooted at v2 , which encodes the
following intermediate hypothesis: “Visibility of blue light from galaxies increases with an increase
in galaxy size and decrease in star density”, where galaxy_color (v2 ) is the target variable with
independent variables galaxy_size (v3 ) and galaxy_density (v4 ). Note further that due to there
existing ancestor edges from v3 and v4 to v0 , Th also encodes the hypothesis: “The visibility of a
galaxy reduces with distance from Earth combined with an increase in galaxy size and decrease in
star density”, where the target variable is v0 and the independent variables are v3 and v4 .
(Task) Dataset. We formally define a dataset D on which hypothesis search and verification is
performed as a collection of tuples {xi }m
                                         i=1 that supports multiple hypothesis semantic trees resulting
in a semantic forest F := ∪i Th(i) , where each xi is a row in the dataset and x ∈ xi is an observation
for a particular column. Further, xi may span only a subset of nodes in F, i.e., not all nodes in F may
be observed. Specifically, while roots and leaves are always observed, internal nodes (target variables
for intermediate hypotheses) may be latent. Therefore, multiple versions of D may be collected for F
with different degrees of observability of internal nodes, altering the difficulty of the discovery task.


4     D ISCOVERY B ENCH

We now introduce a novel benchmark, D ISCOVERY B ENCH, for discovering data-driven hypotheses.
In this benchmark, a data-driven discovery task is defined as follows: Given one or more task
dataset(s) D and a discovery goal G, derive a hypothesis h = ψ(c, v, r) addressing G with the highest
specificity for the context c, variables v, and relationship r supported by D. Optionally, a workflow of
deriving such a hypothesis can be outputted to augment information already present in the hypothesis.
D ISCOVERY B ENCH has two components: DB-R EAL encompassing data-driven hypotheses and
workflows derived from published scientific papers and DB-S YNTH capturing systemic variations in
data-driven hypotheses and workflows obtained from synthetically generated datasets. We release our
dataset under the ODC-BY license: https://github.com/allenai/discoverybench.


4.1   DB-R EAL: Collecting data-driven hypotheses in the wild

Our goal is to replicate the scientific process undertaken by researchers to search for and validate a
hypothesis from one or more datasets. We focus on six scientific domains where data-driven research
is the cornerstone of scientific progress: sociology, biology, humanities, economics, engineering, and
meta-science. Our data collection follows either a data-first or code-first approach.
For the data-first approach: 1) we filter papers based on open public datasets (D) such as National
Longitudinal Surveys (NLS), Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF), and World Bank Open
Data (WBOD) that have workflow details; 2) we then try to replicate these workflows in Python. For
this data-first approach, replication took up to 90 person-hours per dataset, often (30%) not resulting
in success. This highlights building data-driven discovery benchmarks from real studies is not only
challenging and time-consuming, but automating discovery can also be key for scientific progress
and reproducibility.
The data-first approach by design is limited to well-known aforementioned public datasets. To
improve diversity in domains, datasets (D), and workflows, we also adopted a code-first approach
to look beyond popular public datasets. In this approach, we 1) search for code repositories based
on scientific papers with available datasets and 2) attempt to replicate them in Python with existing
code or from scratch with interpretation of the associated paper. We looked at 785 data points in
Zenodo, EU’s Open Research Repository, with a filter for computational notebooks. Over 85% of
the repositories either had missing code, code that could not be easily translated to Python, or a


                                                   4
  filtering based on            taking out outlier health &           combining worldbank data about income, savings,
  demographics for              social values for nls data            education, exports, school enrollment
  sociology data

                                                                                                                               statistical tests to

            Data Preparation (569)                                Basic Statistics (158)                                       verify invasion vector
                                                                                                                               for non-native flora
                                                                                                    statistical 

                                                                        summary 
                      tests                   data deduplication
                                                                        statistics                                             for meta-analysis on
                                                                                                                               replication studies
            data selection               data 

                                    standardization
                                                                                                    correlation


                                                                                                                            feature engg to create samesave
                                                                                                                            & dissave variables in nls data

                                                                   Feature Engg. (112)
                                                                                                                             regression to explain spatial
                                                                                                                             variation in speciation rates
              data cleaning
                                                                                                                             time series analysis & pca
                                       data matching                                                                         applied for archaeological data
                                                                                                    time series

                                                                    regression                        analysis            quantile regression to study effect
                                                                                                                          of wealth levels of incarceration

                                          data 
                                                       pca      spatial
                                                                                                               analysis
                                                                                                                          across demographics
                                       deduplication
             data integration                                                      quantile
                                                                                  regression
                                                            interaction mixture
                                                              analysis models
                                                                                       gini coeff
                                                                                                           ecological
                                                                                                           modelling              econometric modeling

                                     statistical sampling                         glm mediation     econ     pollen               for world bank indicators
                                                                                        analysis             dating
                                                                                                                                  & immigration data

        Advanced Statistics (104)                 Other (41)                  Domain Specific (26)

                      Figure 3: Workflow categories in DB-R EAL with representative examples.

proprietary/non-open dataset. We finalized a candidate list of 14 repositories, but in the end, 3 of
them passed all our checks for their hypotheses to be included in the benchmark2 .
Upon replication of the result or implementation of the full procedure as described in the paper, we
include the (dataset D, hypothesis h, implementation workflow) tuple to the benchmark.
During the process, the implementation workflow may lead to other hypotheses that are not directly
reported in the paper but can be supported by the data. We included them in D ISCOVERY B ENCH,
which leads to a good mix of already reported science-worthy hypotheses as well as novel hypotheses
grounded in datasets. This is particularly useful as our goal is to evaluate LLMs’ ability to solve a
discovery task that is realistic but never reported before.
Finally, the task datasets are supplemented with a dataset description, natural language descriptions
of the columns, and additional background knowledge related to the domain or the datasets. Some of
our tasks, for instance, archaeology, require domain knowledge to derive a particular hypothesis.
Inferring task difficulty. Using the hypothesis semantic tree defined in Section 3, we say that
the difficulty of a discovery task is proportional to the path length from an observed node to the
target hypothesis node in the tree. However, knowing the tree structure from a task dataset alone is
impractical due to incomplete a priori information about unobserved intermediate nodes and edges
between observed nodes. To infer task difficulty, we, therefore, approximate the path length between
the target and leaf nodes using the length of the implementation workflow required to derive a target
hypothesis. Specifically, for each step in the workflow, we add 1 to the discovery path length. In
some cases, we derive two tasks: easy and hard from the same hypothesis, where for easy, we provide
the derived variables as observed variables in the dataset (e.g., BMI), and for hard, it would require
deriving intermediate variables (BMI from height and weight) to reach the target. Additionally,
given the view of a task dataset as encoding the union of multiple semantic trees rooted at different
hypotheses, i.e., a semantic forest F, we further posit that task difficulty increases as the number of
trees in the forest (|F|) increases. Intuitively, discovery becomes harder as the hypothesis search
space increases. In practice, this setting is observed when a task requires access to multiple datasets.
Forming discovery goals. By definition, each hypothesis can be fully specified by the declarative
sentence as h := ψ(c, v, r). To systematically construct the discovery goals for the task, we first
mask one of each dimension, context c, variable v, relationship r, and generate a discovery goal to
   2
       Some repositories include hypotheses from multiple papers as their background.


                                                                                  5
identify the masked information given the rest of the hypothesis and the task dataset(s). For instance,
for a target hypothesis, “The effect of socioeconomic status on college degree completion is higher
for females (0.4995) than males (0.4467)”, we form a discovery goal as “How does socioeconomic
status impact on college degree completion for females compared to males?” seeking the relationship
r to be discovered from the dataset(s) given the relevant variables v and context c. Additionally, we
ensure each discovery goal leads to only one answer, i.e., the target hypothesis.

4.1.1      Features of DB-R EAL benchmark

D ISCOVERY B ENCH incorporates a broad landscape of                                                Train     Test
data-driven discovery. With over 500 instances of data
preparation activities such as cleaning, deduplication, and           # tasks                        25          239
integration, captures the complexity of real-world data pre-          # unique hypotheses            14          144
processing for discovery. Tasks also demand a spectrum of             # tasks need > 1 dataset        4          110
statistical methods, from statistical tests to mixture models,        # domains                       3           6
and include domain-specific approaches in econometric                      Table 1: Statistics for DB-R EAL
and ecological modeling, as reflected in the Fig 33 .
Table 1 shows the diversity of tasks both in train and test split for DB-R EAL. Most importantly,
the benchmark incorporates 114 (4 + 110) tasks that require more than one related datasets to be
analyzed, with a maximum of 6 datasets for a task. Each workflow within the dataset can be viewed
as a composition of unit actions—such as code generation for statistical tests—that LLMs excel at,
showing how our tasks require the chaining of such atomic actions to address complex scenarios for
data-driven discovery. We measure the complexity of these workflows by quantifying the number of
unit actions involved, referring to this as the workflow length, whose distribution can be seen in Fig 5.

4.2       DB-S YNTH: Generating data-driven hypotheses using LLMs

To scale data collection, we next introduce a supplementary benchmark, which is synthetically
constructed to enable controlled model evaluations. Our goal is to reverse-engineer the process of
hypothesis discovery to synthesize datasets and discovery tasks of varying difficulty that require
analysis workflows similar to those in the real-world benchmark. Our approach leverages the broad
pre-trained knowledge of LLMs in four stages:
Domain sampling: First, we prompt the model to generate a list of diverse topics or domains along
with their natural language descriptions. E.g., “Ancient architecture” → “Related to historic buildings,
architectural marvels, and ancient construction techniques”.
Semantic tree construction: For each domain, we then build a semantic tree Th , recursively deriving
nodes starting from a primary hypothesis h. Specifically, we prompt the model with the domain and a
sampled real-world workflow (e.g., “within-cluster analysis”) to generate a hypothesis and its target
variable. Setting the target variable as root, we then derive child nodes by generating the independent
variables required to verify h using V(·). We operationalize this by generating a column name and
description for each child node (along with a data type and range) and a pandas expression4 [49] over
only independent variables in Th such that its execution results in the target variable. We repeat this
with each leaf in Th as the root of a new semantic sub-tree, generating intermediate hypotheses and a
new set of variables until the desired height of T is reached.5 We also generate a set of distractor
columns disjoint from nodes in T , thus resulting in a synthetic semantic forest F.
Data generation: We then construct a task dataset D := {xi }m      i=1 by generating synthetic data in
a bottom-up manner (i.e., from leaves to root) for each node in F. Starting with various sampling
strategies for leaf nodes (see more in Sec D), for each subsequent level in F, we create new columns
for nodes by simply executing their pandas expressions. Finally, to mimic real-world challenges in
data collection, we probabilistically perturb each instance x ∈ xi by adding noise or dropping values
to create missing data6 . Note that at this stage, D contains a column for each node in F.

      3
        A task may require multiple data preparation and analytical activities
      4
        The pandas expression encodes the structured hypothesis ψ(c, v, r).
      5
        In practice, with probability 0.6, we choose whether a node is derived further or marked as a leaf.
      6
        Each value is noised independently; therefore, each row has sufficient true data useful for discovery.


                                                          6
                                                                                                            (l)
Task generation: For each internal node h in F, we now create multiple task datasets Dh from D,
varying the difficulty of the discovery task based on the path length l between h and the observed
independent variables in F. Finally, we follow the same strategy for goal formulation as DB-R EAL.
We generate 903 tasks over 48 diverse domains and assign them to train, dev, and test sets using a
60/20/20 split, where each task is additionally tagged with a difficulty level from 1-4. While we
evaluate our agents on the test, the training set can serve as supervised data for improving models.

4.3        Evaluation

We evaluate task performance by measuring the alignment of the predicted and gold hypotheses in
natural language.7 We take inspiration from recent works in LLM benchmarking [43, 54, 52, 14,
26, 27] and design a model-based evaluation strategy using gpt-4-preview-0125 as the evaluator,
conditioned on our structured formalism of data-driven hypotheses.
Recall the propositional form h := ϕ(h1 , . . . , hn ) of a hypothesis h that decomposes it into sub-
hypotheses. We first use our GPT-4 based evaluator to independently decompose the gold (hg ) and
predicted (hp ) hypotheses into their respective sub-hypotheses {hgi }ni=1 and {hpj }m  j=1 , asking it to
also identify, for each sub-hypothesis hk , its context, variables, and relationship dimensions (prompt
in Listing 1). Given this structured representation of the gold and predicted hypotheses, we then
compute a hypothesis match score (HMS), which measures the degree to which two hypotheses
align on each dimension, as follows.
To compute HMS, we match each predicted sub-hypothesis hpj with a gold sub-hypothesis hgi when
their contexts are judged as equivalent by our GPT-4 based evaluator (prompt in Listing 2).8 Let M
denote this set of context-matched pairs of predicted and gold sub-hypotheses. At this point, treating
each sub-hypothesis context as a single unit, we can compute an F1 score, ctxF1 , capturing how
aligned the n contexts of sub-hypothesis of hg with the m contexts of sub-hypotheses of hp . Then,
for each matched pair of sub-hypotheses, we measure how well the variables and relations align,
using an F1 score for the variables (varF1 ) and an accuracy score for the relation (relacc ). Specifically,
for each sub-hypothesis pair in M , we extract the set of interacting variables in the gold and predicted
sub-hypotheses using the GPT-4 based evaluator (prompt in Listing 3). We compute the alignment
between these two sets of variables as an F1 score, varF1 , similar to how ctxF1 was computed. For
relationships, we compute relationship accuracy with reference to the relationship between the gold
variables (relacc ) based on evaluator judgments using the following scoring heuristic: 100 if there is
an exact match of the relation, 50 when the predicted relationship is broader than the gold relationship
but encompasses it, and 0 otherwise (prompt in Listing 4). Finally, we compute HMS ∈ [0, 100] as the
average alignment of the variable and relationship dimensions over context-matched sub-hypotheses,
weighted by the overall context alignment:
                                                           |M |
                                                       1 X                                             
                 HMS(hp , hg ) = ctxF1 (hp , hg ) ×             varF1 (hpi , hgi ) × relacc (hpi , hgi )
                                                      |M | i=1


5         Experiments
5.1        Discovery Agents

We benchmark state-of-the-art LLM-based few-shot reasoning methods as discovery agents with
two closed models, GPT-4o and GPT-4-0125-preview (GPT-4p), and one open, Llama-3-70B, model
powering the reasoning methods. A discovery agent takes the task description, paths to the task
dataset(s) D, metadata about the datasets (description, column descriptions), and the goal, G, to
produce a natural language (NL) hypothesis specified by context, variables, and relationship.
• CodeGen generates the entire code at one go to solve the task, where we provide a demonstration
  of a solution code in the context. After code execution and based on the result, it generates the NL
  hypothesis and summarizes the workflow.
• ReAct [51] solves the task by generating thought and subsequent codes in a multi-turn fashion.
      7
          We deliberately take an outcome-based approach as > 1 discovery path may lead to the same hypothesis.
      8
          Note that at most one gold sub-hypothesis is matched with a predicted sub-hypothesis.


                                                          7
                                                                                                                                14
                           GPT-4o   GPT-4p   Llama-3                          1.0
      DB-R EAL                                                                                                                  12
                                                                              0.8




                                                       avg (varF1 × relacc)
      NoDataGuess            0.0      4.7     11.5                                                                              10




                                                                                                                                    counts in bin
      CodeGen               15.5     16.3     12.1
                                                                              0.6
      React                 15.4     15.6     13.5                                                                              8
      DataVoyager           15.4     13.9     11.5
      Reflexion (Oracle)    24.5     19.5     22.5                            0.4                                               6
      DB-S YNTH
                                                                              0.2                                               4
      CodeGen               14.1      8.7     10.9
      React                 11.6      7.4     12.0
                                                                              0.0                                               2
      DataVoyager            5.7      6.9     11.7
                                                                                    0.0   0.2   0.4           0.6   0.8   1.0
      Reflexion (Oracle)    15.7     12.9     23.2                                                    ctxF1
Figure 4: (Left) Hypothesis Matching Scores (HMS) across agent-LLM pairs in DB-R EAL and DB-S YNTH.
(Right) Scatter plot for ctxF1 and average varF1 × relacc , showing accurate contexts increases the probability
of predicting variables and relations accurately. Scores are for the best model on DB-R EAL and only include
data points (44.2%) where both scores are non-zero.


• DataVoyager is a multi-component data-driven discovery agent from [33]. It has four components,
  planner, code generator, data analysis, and critic, that orchestrate the discovery process.
• Reflexion (Oracle) [44] is an extension of CodeGen agent, where at the end of one trial, we provide
  the “oracle” HMS score as an evaluation signal, and it generates a reflection to improve (when
  HMS < 1) in the next trial till it solves the task, or maximum trials (3) are reached.
• NoDataGuess guesses the hypothesis (in DB-R EAL) just from the dataset description and the goal
  without accessing the datasets where we measure LLM’s memorization of already published works.

5.2     Main Results

Fig 4(left) shows that overall performance for all framework-LLM pairs is low for both DB-R EAL and
DB-S YNTH, highlighting the challenging nature of the task and the benchmark. Most importantly,
effective reasoning prompts such as React and planning with a self-critic (DataVoyager) do not
help improve the simple CodeGen agent. But with oracle feedback, Reflexion (Oracle) significantly
improves over CodeGen (base) performance. Analysis reveals that almost all non-reflexion agents
solve the easiest (in terms of workflow category and length) instances from the benchmark. GPT-4o
refuses to hallucinate in the NoDataGuess baseline, whereas surprisingly Llama-3 performs similarly
in both data and no-data modes. We additionally observe that the models’ performance in DB-R EAL
and DB-S YNTH are similar, indicating our synthetic benchmark captures complexities of the real
workflow but provides a systematic way to analyze the models’ performance.

5.3     Analysis

Context is important. Fig 4(right) shows the trends of the ctxF1 and combined varF1 × relacc . A
positive trend signifies that to predict variables and relationships accurately, precise and accurate
context prediction is necessary. However, correct identification of context is an important first step,
although it does not guarantee success.
Workflow complexity barrier. Almost all agents struggle more with tasks involving complex
statistical techniques, complex data preparation methods, or domain-specific models. The top three
workflow categories where the best non-oracle model was highly performant are correlation analysis
(55%), data selection (18%), and summary statistics (18%), whereas the lowest three workflow
categories are spatial analysis (0%), pollen dating (0%), and ecological modeling (0%).
Domain knowledge dependency. To check if additional domain helps agents perform better, we
collect targeted domain knowledge for the archaeology-related tasks that needed significant domain
knowledge during data collection. When added as additional hints, we find that DataVoyager’s
(GPT-4p) performance jumps from 9.9% (w/ domain knowledge) to 17.5% (w/o domain knowledge).
Performance across domains and goal types. Fig 5(a) depicts that biology (0%) and engineering
(7%) perform the worst due to their higher dependence on advanced statistical methods, while
economics (25%) and sociology (23%) perform better. Additionally, Fig 5(b) shows goals related to
discovering a relationship given context and variables are more easily solved than the other two types


                                                       8
                        (a)                               (b)                              (c)
                                                                      DB-Real         DB-Synth




Figure 5: Best non-oracle agent’s performance (HMS) (a) across domains, (b) for goal types (dimen-
sion to be discovered), and (c) for different workflow lengths. In (c) workflow length categories for
DB-R EAL are s: < 10, m: > 10, < 20, l: > 20. For DB-S YNTH, it is the semantic tree height.


of goals, finding context and variables. This is explained by the complexity of the hypothesis search,
which is broader for finding the right context or a set of variables given a fixed relationship, whereas
finding the relationship given context and variables is easier.
Impact of workflow length. Inherently, the difficulty of the tasks is measured by the gold workflow
length (DB-R EAL) or the height of the semantic tree (DB-S YNTH). Figure 5(c) shows a decreasing
trend in performance as workflow length (hence, complexity) increases. The performance drops
significantly even for medium-length workflows, highlighting current agents’ limitations.

6   Conclusion
We present D ISCOVERY B ENCH, the first data-driven discovery benchmark consisting of 264 discovery
tasks that capture real scientific workflows extracted from published works. We supplement this with
903 structurally generated synthetic tasks, tailored to evaluate discovery agents at various levels of
difficulty. We benchmark state-of-the-art reasoning frameworks with the most advanced LLMs, but
the best agent’s performance only peaks at 25% underscoring the challenging nature of the task and
the benchmark. We hope our timely contribution can increase interest and efforts in making progress
on reliable and reproducible autonomous scientific discovery using large generative models.

References
 [1] K. L. Alexander, C. Riordan, J. Fennessey, and A. M. Pallas. Social background, academic
     resources, and college graduation: Recent evidence from the national longitudinal survey.
     American Journal of Education, 90(4):315–333, 1982.
 [2] A. P. S. Alves, M. Kalinowski, G. Giray, D. Mendez, N. Lavesson, K. Azevedo, H. Villamizar,
     T. Escovedo, H. Lopes, S. Biffl, et al. Status quo and problems of requirements engineering
     for machine learning: Results from an international survey. In International Conference on
     Product-Focused Software Process Improvement, pages 159–174. Springer, 2023.
 [3] R. Apel and G. Sweeten. The impact of incarceration on employment during the transition to
     adulthood. Social problems, 57(3):448–479, 2010.
 [4] E. N. Appiah. The effect of education expenditure on per capita gdp in developing countries.
     International Journal of Economics and Finance, 9(10):136–144, 2017.
 [5] J. Brinkmann. Copper output, demand for wood and energy expenditure–evaluating economic
     aspects of bronze age metallurgy. How’s life, pages 11–34, 2019.
 [6] J. P. Brozio, J. Müller, M. Furholt, W. Kirleis, S. Dreibrodt, I. Feeser, W. Dörfler, M. Weinelt,
     H. Raese, and A. Bock. Monuments and economies: What drove their variability in the
     middle-holocene neolithic? The Holocene, 29(10):1558–1571, 2019.
 [7] J. P. Brozio, J. Kneisel, S. Schaefer-Di Maida, J. Laabs, I. Feeser, A. Ribeiro, and S. Schultrich.
     Patterns of socio-economic cultural transformations in neolithic and bronze age societies in the
     central northern european plain: Human-environmental interaction concerning bourdieu’s forms


                                                   9
     of capital. In Perspectives on Socio-environmental Transformations in Ancient Europe, pages
     105–142. Springer, 2024.
 [8] F. O. Cerezer, C. S. Dambros, M. T. Coelho, F. A. Cassemiro, E. Barreto, J. S. Albert, R. O.
     Wüest, and C. H. Graham. Accelerated body size evolution in upland environments is correlated
     with recent speciation in south american freshwater fishes. Nature Communications, 14(1):6070,
     2023.
 [9] M. Chen, J. Tworek, H. Jun, Q. Yuan, H. P. d. O. Pinto, J. Kaplan, H. Edwards, Y. Burda,
     N. Joseph, G. Brockman, et al. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
[10] M. Dal Corso, W. Kirleis, J. Kneisel, N. Taylor, M. Wieckowska-Lüth, and M. Zanon. How’s
     Life? Living Conditions in the 2nd and 1st Millennia BCE. Sidestone Press, 2019.
[11] C. Dougherty. Numeracy, literacy and earnings: Evidence from the national longitudinal survey
     of youth. Economics of education review, 22(5):511–521, 2003.
[12] I. Feeser, W. Dörfler, J. Kneisel, M. Hinz, and S. Dreibrodt. Human impact and population
     dynamics in the neolithic and bronze age: Multi-proxy evidence from north-western central
     europe. The Holocene, 29(10):1596–1606, 2019.
[13] M. Feurer, A. Klein, K. Eggensperger, J. Springenberg, M. Blum, and F. Hutter. Efficient and
     robust automated machine learning. In NeurIPS, 2015.
[14] J. Fu, S.-K. Ng, Z. Jiang, and P. Liu. Gptscore: Evaluate as you desire. ArXiv, abs/2302.04166,
     2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:256662188.
[15] P. Gijsbers, M. L. P. Bueno, S. Coors, E. LeDell, S. Poirier, J. Thomas, B. Bischl, and
     J. Vanschoren. Amlb: an automl benchmark. ArXiv, abs/2207.12560, 2022. URL https:
     //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:251066648.
[16] D. J. Glass and N. Hall. A brief history of the hypothesis. Cell, 134(3):378–381, 2008.
[17] R. Heyard and L. Held. Meta-regression to explain shrinkage and heterogeneity in large-scale
     replication projects. Technical report, Center for Open Science, 2024.
[18] H. Jin, F. Chollet, Q. Song, and X. Hu. Autokeras: An automl library for deep learning. J.
     Mach. Learn. Res., 24:6:1–6:6, 2023.
[19] J. Jumper, R. Evans, A. Pritzel, T. Green, M. Figurnov, O. Ronneberger, K. Tunyasuvunakool,
     R. Bates, A. Žídek, A. Potapenko, et al. Highly accurate protein structure prediction with
     alphafold. Nature, 596(7873):583–589, 2021.
[20] E. Kaiser and W. Schier. Time and Materiality: Periodization and Regional Chronologies at
     the Transition from Bronze to Iron Age in Eurasia (1200-600 BCE). Edited by Elke Kaiser and
     Wolfram Schier. Verlag Marie Leidorf GmbH, 2021.
[21] H. Kitano. Artificial intelligence to win the nobel prize and beyond: Creating the engine for
     scientific discovery. AI magazine, 37(1):39–49, 2016.
[22] J. Kneisel. Chronology and transformation. the transition from bronze to iron age in northern
     europe. Time and materiality: Periodization and regional chronologies at the transition from
     Bronze to Iron Age in Eurasia (1200–600 BCE), pages 237–263, 2021.
[23] P. Langley. Data-driven discovery of physical laws. Cogn. Sci., 5:31–54, 1981. URL https:
     //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:39694251.
[24] E. LeDell and S. Poirier. H2O AutoML: Scalable automatic machine learning. In Proceedings
     of the AutoML Workshop at ICML, 2020.
[25] M. Y. Li, E. B. Fox, and N. D. Goodman. Automated statistical model discovery with lan-
     guage models. ArXiv, abs/2402.17879, 2024. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
     CorpusID:268041863.
[26] X. Li, T. Zhang, Y. Dubois, R. Taori, I. Gulrajani, C. Guestrin, P. Liang, and T. B. Hashimoto.
     Alpacaeval: An automatic evaluator of instruction-following models. https://github.com/
     tatsu-lab/alpaca_eval, 2023.
[27] B. Y. Lin, K. Chandu, F. Brahman, Y. Deng, A. Ravichander, V. Pyatkin, R. L. Bras, and Y. Choi.
     Wildbench: Benchmarking language models with challenging tasks from real users in the wild,
     2024. URL https://huggingface.co/spaces/allenai/WildBench.


                                                10
[28] X. Liu, Z. Wu, X. Wu, P. Lu, K.-W. Chang, and Y. Feng. Are llms capable of data-based
     statistical and causal reasoning? benchmarking advanced quantitative reasoning with data.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17644, 2024.
[29] L. Lorenz. Kommunikationsstrukturen mittelneolithischer Gesellschaften im nordmitteleuropäis-
     chen Tiefland. Verlag Dr. Rudolf Habelt GmbH, in Kommission, 2018.
[30] A. Madaan, N. Tandon, P. Gupta, S. Hallinan, L. Gao, S. Wiegreffe, U. Alon, N. Dziri,
     S. Prabhumoye, Y. Yang, S. Gupta, B. P. Majumder, K. Hermann, S. Welleck, A. Yazdanbakhsh,
     and P. Clark. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. In Thirty-seventh Conference
     on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
     id=S37hOerQLB.
[31] S.-D. Maida et al. Unter hügeln: Bronzezeitliche transformationsprozesse in schleswig-holstein
     am beispiel des fundplatzes von mang de bargen (bornhöved, kr. segeberg) band 1, 2023.
[32] B. P. Majumder, B. D. Mishra, P. Jansen, O. Tafjord, N. Tandon, L. Zhang, C. Callison-Burch,
     and P. Clark. CLIN: A continually learning language agent for rapid task adaptation and
     generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10134, 2023.
[33] B. P. Majumder, H. Surana, D. Agarwal, S. Hazra, A. Sabharwal, and P. Clark. Data-driven
     discovery with large generative models. ICML, 2024.
[34] G. I. P. Ottaviano, G. Peri, and G. C. Wright. Immigration, offshoring, and american jobs.
     American Economic Review, 103(5):1925–1959, 2013.
[35] L. C. Pal. Impact of education on economic development. Khazanah Pendidikan Islam, 5(1):
     10–19, 2023.
[36] A. Palmisano, A. Bevan, A. Kabelindde, N. Roberts, and S. Shennan. Long-term demographic
     trends in prehistoric italy: Climate impacts and regionalised socio-ecological trajectories.
     Journal of world prehistory, 34(3):381–432, 2021.
[37] E. W. Parkinson, T. R. McLaughlin, C. Esposito, S. Stoddart, and C. Malone. Radiocarbon
     dated trends and central mediterranean prehistory. Journal of world prehistory, 34:317–379,
     2021.
[38] N. Rambeli, D. A. A. Marikan, J. M. Podivinsky, R. Amiruddin, and I. Ismail. The dynamic
     impact of government expenditure in education on economic growth. International Journal of
     Business and Society, 22(3):1487–1507, 2021.
[39] M. Riera, J. Pino, L. Sáez, P. Aymerich, and Y. Melero. Effect of introduction pathways on
     the invasion success of non-native plants along environmental gradients. Biological Invasions,
     pages 1–20, 2024.
[40] B. Roziere, J. Gehring, F. Gloeckle, S. Sootla, I. Gat, X. E. Tan, Y. Adi, J. Liu, T. Remez,
     J. Rapin, et al. Code llama: Open foundation models for code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950,
     2023.
[41] T. Schick, J. Dwivedi-Yu, R. Dessì, R. Raileanu, M. Lomeli, E. Hambro, L. Zettlemoyer,
     N. Cancedda, and T. Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools.
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
[42] Z. Shao, F. Wang, Y. Xu, W. Wei, C. Yu, Z. Zhang, D. Yao, G. Jin, X. Cao, G. Cong, C. S. Jensen,
     and X. Cheng. Exploring progress in multivariate time series forecasting: Comprehensive
     benchmarking and heterogeneity analysis. ArXiv, abs/2310.06119, 2023.
[43] S. Shashidhar, A. Chinta, V. Sahai, Z. Wang, and H. Ji. Democratizing llms: An exploration of
     cost-performance trade-offs in self-refined open-source models. ArXiv, abs/2310.07611, 2023.
     URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:263834891.
[44] N. Shinn, F. Cassano, B. Labash, A. Gopinath, K. Narasimhan, and S. Yao. Reflexion:
     Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In NeurIPS, 2023. URL https:
     //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:258833055.
[45] P. K. Smith, B. Bogin, and D. Bishai. Are time preference and body mass index associated?:
     Evidence from the national longitudinal survey of youth. Economics & Human Biology, 3(2):
     259–270, 2005.
[46] C. Sommerfeld. Gerätegeld Sichel: studien zur monetären Struktur bronzezeitlicher Horte im
     nördlichen Mitteleuropa, volume 19. Walter de Gruyter, 2013.


                                                11
[47] W. H. Thompson and S. Skau. On the scope of scientific hypotheses. Royal Society Open
     Science, 10(8):230607, 2023.
[48] H. Weatherly, K. Lopez, and C. Tierra. The impact of education on gdp per capita. 2022.
[49] Wes McKinney. Data Structures for Statistical Computing in Python. In Stéfan van der Walt
     and Jarrod Millman, editors, Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference, pages 56 –
     61, 2010. doi: 10.25080/Majora-92bf1922-00a.
[50] Z. Yang, X. Liu, T. Li, D. Wu, J. Wang, Y. Zhao, and H. Han. A systematic literature review
     of methods and datasets for anomaly-based network intrusion detection. Comput. Secur., 116:
     102675, 2022.
[51] S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. R. Narasimhan, and Y. Cao. ReAct: Synergizing
     reasoning and acting in language models. In ICLR, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/
     forum?id=WE_vluYUL-X.
[52] Z. Yuan, J. Liu, Q. Zi, M. Liu, X. Peng, and Y. Lou. Evaluating instruction-tuned large
     language models on code comprehension and generation. ArXiv, abs/2308.01240, 2023. URL
     https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:260379087.
[53] K. Zaw, D. Hamilton, and W. Darity. Race, wealth and incarceration: Results from the national
     longitudinal survey of youth. Race and Social Problems, 8:103–115, 2016.
[54] Z. Zeng, J. Yu, T. Gao, Y. Meng, T. Goyal, and D. Chen. Evaluating large language
     models at evaluating instruction following. ArXiv, abs/2310.07641, 2023. URL https:
     //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:263834884.
[55] S. Zhang, C. Gong, L. Wu, X. Liu, and M. Zhou. AutoML-GPT: Automatic machine learning
     with GPT. ArXiv, abs/2305.02499, 2023.


A    FAQs
     1. Dataset or Benchmark: Is this a dataset or a benchmark? A benchmark
     2. Benchmark: For benchmarks, the supplementary materials must ensure that all results are
        easily reproducible (i.e., all necessary datasets, code, and evaluation procedures must be
        accessible and documented)
        Datasets:      D ISCOVERY B ENCH is released at https://github.com/allenai/
        discoverybench/tree/main/discoverybench .
        Code (Baseline Models): Code for Discovery Agents are provided in the repository,
        at: https://github.com/allenai/discoverybench/tree/main/agents. A CLI is
        available to run the discovery agents on the benchmark.
        Evaluation Procedures: Please follow our main paper for the details of our evaluation
        process. The code to run eval on a single instance of our benchmark is provided at: https://
        github.com/allenai/discoverybench/tree/main/eval. A CLI and some example
        scripts have been provided as well.
     3. Accessibility: The following are accessibility items on the submission checklist:
        Links to access the benchmark: The link to access the benchmark is provided in
        the main submission (https://github.com/allenai/discoverybench/tree/main/
        discoverybench).
        Any data should use open and widely used formats. Simulation environments should
        explain how they can be used: Our data are stored in widely accessible standard formats
        (e.g., JSON, CSV), with the structure described in Appendix F.
        Long-term preservation. Code and data are provided on G ITHUB. All aspects will be
        publicly available for a long term.
        Explicit Licence: Our benchmark is licensed using ODC-BY and the associated code is
        licensed with A PACHE 2.0, as included in the G ITHUB repository.
        Structured Metadata for a dataset: Our dataset is also available as the HuggingFace
        dataset: https://huggingface.co/datasets/allenai/discoverybench. Struc-
        tured Metadata will be available once we finalize our work after addressing the reviewers’
        comments, if any.
        A persistent dereferenceable identifier (e.g., a code repository such as GitHub): The
        repository for our benchmark is: https://github.com/allenai/discoverybench.


                                                12
B        Limitations

We currently filtered domains and tasks that required forecasting, simulation, or very specific modeling
(species distribution, infection spread, astrophysics equations for exoplanets) in the benchmark as
they were very time-consuming to replicate as well as discover hypotheses. As a result, we discarded
more papers focused on natural and physical sciences compared to social sciences, which we plan to
include in future benchmarks.
We currently do not tackle the challenge of understanding and processing massive datasets, such
as the 8.92 petabytes data from the Cancer Genome Atlas (https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov)
or the extensive brain data from the Allen Institute (https://alleninstitute.org/division/
brain-science). While the potential to discover new insights from such vast data volumes is
significant, ensuring these findings are robust and not subject to p-hacking remains unaddressed by
our current methods.
We currently do not handle multi-modal data and complex pipelines, such as those needed for
analyzing satellite and other geospatial data relevant to climate science and astronomy data. This
would involve multiple stages of data processing, the use of various tools, and managing workflow
complexities, for example, analyzing thousands of species patterns combined with satellite data
to study habitats. So we do not incorporate workflows like those of EarthRanger (https://www.
earthranger.com).
Ethical Considerations There could be many potential societal consequences of systems tuned on
our proposed benchmark since it involves using LLMs, such as policy misuse, legal ramifications,
and false discovery. On the positive side, our proposed benchmark can advance the rate of discovery,
leading to an improved standard of living and social well-being.


C        Data collection for DB-R EAL

For data-first approach, replication took 15 to 40 person-hours for each NLS-related paper and up to
90 person-hours for the GBIF dataset, where specialized domain knowledge and tools led to higher
complexity. All papers replicated in the NLS dataset were included, while less than half of the papers
in specialized datasets like GBIF and WBOD were added to D ISCOVERY B ENCH.
Citation/Repositories for DB-R EAL: List of scientific works from where we have replicated our
gold workflows and hypotheses:

          1. Sociology: [53, 3, 1, 45, 11]
          2. Biology: [8, 39]
          3. Economics: [35, 4, 48, 38, 34]
          4. Engineering: [2]
          5. Meta-science: [17]
          6. Humanities: [7, 6, 29, 31, 46, 12, 37, 22, 20, 5, 10, 36, 37]

All assets come under CC license or open licenses.


D        Data Generation for DB-S YNTH

For leaves, we use different sampling strategies based on the data type. Specifically, for categorical
nodes, we sample instances with replacement from the range of allowed values, whereas for numeric,
we first select a distribution (e.g., normal) and its parameters based on the specified range and then
perform sampling. For each subsequent level in F, we create new columns for nodes by simply
executing their pandas expressions9 . To recover from any execution errors, we additionally use a
self-refine [30] approach to generate new pandas expressions guided by the execution error logs.
Finally, to mimic real-world challenges in data collection, we probabilistically perturb each instance
    9
        The expression is guaranteed to only have variables already generated due to the bottom-up construction.


                                                        13
x ∈ xi by adding noise or dropping values to create missing data10 . After generation, D contains a
column for each node in F.

E         Datasheets
E.1        Motivation
            • For what purpose was the dataset created? D ISCOVERY B ENCH is created to help assess
              large language models’ (LLMs) ability to automate the search and verification of hypotheses
              purely from a set of provided datasets.
            • Who created the dataset (e.g., which team, research group) and on behalf of which
              entity (e.g., company, institution, organization)? Authors belong to the Allen Institute for
              AI, OpenLocus, and the University of Massachusetts Amherst. The data collection is part of
              research efforts conducted by the Allen Institute for AI.
            • Who funded the creation of the dataset? Allen Institute for AI.

E.2        Collection Process
            • How was the data associated with each instance acquired? Our goal is to replicate the
              scientific process undertaken by researchers to search for and validate a hypothesis from
              one or more datasets. We focus on six scientific domains where data-driven research is the
              cornerstone of scientific progress: sociology, biology, humanities, economics, engineering,
              and meta-science. Our data collection follows either a data-first or code-first approach.
              Each instance has been manually implemented and verified by the authors for solvability.

E.3        Uses
            • Has the dataset been used for any tasks already? We use this benchmark to evaluate
              LLM’s ability to search and verify hypotheses purely from a set of datasets.
            • Are there tasks for which the dataset should not be used? We do not expect the commu-
              nity members to use this data to train models that can aggravate p-hacking.

E.4        Distribution and Maintainance
            • How will the dataset will be distributed? We distribute this benchmark via our
              G ITHUB repository: https://github.com/allenai/discoverybench and https:
              //huggingface.co/datasets/allenai/discoverybench.
            • How can the owner/curator/manager of the dataset be contacted? For any
              benchmark-related queries, please contact: bodhisattwam@allenai.org. For any code-
              related discussions, please raise an issue in G ITHUB: https://github.com/allenai/
              discoverybench.

F        Composition of D ISCOVERY B ENCH
F.1       Metadata structure
            • id: An identifier for the metadata.
            • domain: The broad field of study or area of research.
            • workflow_tags: A set of keywords summarizing the main processes or techniques used in
              the replication implementation. They provide an overview of the methodological approach
              and facilitating the identification of relevant analytical techniques.
            • domain_knowledge:
                  – Contextual information or insights related to the dataset, explaining how certain behav-
                    iors or variables can be interpreted within the field of study.
    10
         Each value is noised independently; therefore, each row has sufficient true data useful for discovery.


                                                           14
            – It helps open avenues to think in directions that LLM might not have considered
              otherwise, broadening the understanding of the field.
       • datasets: Contains detailed information about the datasets used, including:
            – name: The name or filename of the dataset.
            – description: A summary of the dataset’s contents and the type of data it includes.
            – max_depth: The maximum hierarchical level of nested data structures within the
              dataset, indicating the complexity of the data.
            – columns: Detailed descriptions of each column in the dataset, including:
                * name: The column’s name or header.
                * description: Explanation of the data contained in the column and its significance.
                * depth: The hierarchical level of the column within the dataset, indicating its
                  structural position.
       • hypotheses: Statements or predictions being tested, divided into:
            – main: Primary hypotheses that are central to the discovery task.
       • workflow: A step-by-step description of the replication process followed to validate the
         hypotheses, outlining the methods and procedures used from data preparation to final
         analysis. Some of the workflows and sub-workflows are high-level and thus the same for
         different queries as they follow the same implementation leading to a range of hypotheses.
       • queries: Goals related to each hypothesis, each including:
            – qid: A unique identifier for the goal for a given true/gold hypothesis.
            – difficulty: Categorization of the difficulty. Structurally defined for DB-S YNTH using
              the semantic tree definition.
            – true_hypothesis: The hypothesis being tested through the goal. This defines the
              primary statement or prediction under investigation.
            – relevant_cols: Columns from the dataset that are relevant to answering the query,
              indicating the specific data points that can be used in the analysis. Only appears for
              DB-S YNTH.
            – target_col: The column being predicted or the dependent variable in the analysis. Only
              appears for DB-S YNTH.
            – question_type: The type of question being asked categorizing the nature of the inquiry.
            – question: The discovery goal.

F.2   Directory structure for DB-R EAL

There may be more than one query per metadata. The train split contains 14 metadata files and 25
queries. The test split contains 144 metadata files and 239 queries. Metadata folders with the same
prefixes use the same underlying dataset with either a subset or a preprocessed version. When dealing
with a full dataset (i.e., nls_raw), the task becomes substantially harder due to the data preparation
required.

      |-test
      |---archaeology
      |---introduction_pathways_non-native_plants
      |---meta_regression
      |---meta_regression_raw
      |---nls_incarceration
      |---nls_raw
      |---nls_ses
      |---requirements_engineering_for_ML_enabled_systems
      |---worldbank_education_gdp
      |---worldbank_education_gdp_indicators
      |-train
      |---evolution_freshwater_fish
      |---immigration_offshoring_effect_on_employment
      |---nls_bmi
      |---nls_bmi_raw


                                                 15
F.3    Directory structure for DB-S YNTH

There is one query per metadata. The train split contains 551 metadata files (queries), the dev split
contains 153 metadata files (queries), and the test split contains 200 metadata files (queries).
      |-test
      |---ancient-languages_*_*
      |---artificial-ecosystems_*_*
      |---astronomy_*_*
      |---board-games_*_*
      |---coding-competitions_*_*
      |---digital-artistry_*_*
      |---futuristic-technology_*_*
      |---impressionist-art_*_*
      |---machine-learning_*_*
      |---molecular-gastronomy_*_*
      |---neuroscience_*_*
      |---philosophical-debates_*_*
      |---robotics_*_*
      |-train
      |---adventure-travel_*_*
      |---ancient-architecture_*_*
      |---ancient-astronomy_*_*
      |---aviation_*_*
      |---biodiversity-conservation_*_*
      |---cryptic-puzzles_*_*
      |---cryptocurrency_*_*
      |---culinary-arts_*_*
      |---cybersecurity_*_*
      |---environmental-activism_*_*
      |---fashion-design_*_*
      |---fine-arts_*_*
      |---literary-classics_*_*
      |---marine-biology_*_*
      |---marine-conservation_*_*
      |---medieval-literature_*_*
      |---musical-therapy_*_*
      |---photography_*_*
      |---robotic-explorers_*_*
      |---solar-power_*_*
      |---space-tourism_*_*
      |---steampunk-culture_*_*
      |---theater-productions_*_*
      |---underwater-archaeology_*_*
      |---urban-gardening_*_*
      |---vintage-automobiles_*_*
      |---virtual-reality_*_*


G      Discovery Agent
The command discovery_agent.py is used with various options to customize its behavior for
discovery tasks. Below are the options explained:
• Usage: discovery_agent.py [OPTIONS] QUERY – Executes the discovery agent with specified
  options.
• Options:
    – –agent_type [coder|react]: Specifies the type of agent to use for discovery. The default
       type is coder. Options include coder for code-related tasks and react for reactive tasks.


                                                 16
    – –model_name TEXT: Sets the model to be used. The default is gpt-4o. Available mod-
      els include gpt-4-turbo, llama-3-70b-chat, claude-3-opus, and gemini-pro. An
      exhaustive list is available in config/model_config.json.
    – –api_config TEXT: Path to the API configuration file.               The default path is
      config/api_config.json.
    – –log_file TEXT: Specifies the path to the log file where operations details are stored.
    – –metadata_path TEXT: Path to the metadata file. This option is required.
    – –metadata_type [real|synth]: Specifies the type of metadata, where real stands for
      actual metadata and synth for synthetic. This option is required.
    – –add_domain_knowledge: Includes domain-specific knowledge in the query processing.
    – –add_workflow_tags: Includes workflow tags in the query to enhance context.
    – –help: Displays the help message and exits, showing all available command options.

H    Evaluation
Explain about evaluation in a line and then explain the CLI usage here.
The command discovery_eval.py is used to evaluate the outputs generated by the discovery agent.
Below are the detailed descriptions of the command options:

• Usage: discovery_eval.py [OPTIONS] QUERY – Executes the evaluation agent with specified
  options and a query.
• Options:
    – –gold_hypo TEXT: Specifies the gold standard hypothesis for comparison. This field is
       required.
    – –gold_workflow TEXT: Specifies the gold standard workflow to be used as a reference
       during evaluation.
    – –pred_hypo TEXT: Specifies the predicted hypothesis generated by the discovery agent. This
       field is required.
    – –pred_workflow TEXT: Specifies the predicted workflow generated by the discovery agent.
    – –metadata_path TEXT: Specifies the path to the metadata file that is utilized during evalua-
       tion. This field is required.
    – –metadata_type [real|synth]: Determines the type of metadata used in the evaluation,
       where real indicates actual metadata and synth indicates synthetic metadata. This field is
       required.
    – –eval_output_path TEXT: Specifies where the evaluation results should be saved.
    – –help: Displays the help message and exits, detailing all available command options.

I   Experiments
For GPT-based models, we use OpenAI API (https://platform.openai.com/docs/
models), and for Llama3, we used Together API (https://docs.together.ai/docs/
inference-models)

J   Evaluator Prompts
We provide below the exact prompts used for our GPT-4 based evaluation of the generated hypothesis
against the gold hypothesis.




                                                17
Listing 1 Decomposition Prompt to obtain sub-hypotheses from a hypothesis.

decomposition_prompt = f"""\
        Given a set of dataset columns, a ground-truth hypothesis, and the
        analysis workflow used, your task is to extract the set of sub-hypotheses
        that are present in the hypothesis such that each sub-hypothesis covers a
        separate context, is self-sufficient, and operates on a coherent set of 3
        dimensions: Context, Variables, and Relations.

         Here are the definitions for these dimensions:

         - Contexts: Boundary conditions that limit the scope of a sub-hypothesis.
         E.g., “for men over the age of 30”, “in Asia and Europe”, or "None" if
         there is no boundary condition specified.

         - Variables: Known concepts that interact in a meaningful way under a
         given context to produce the sub-hypothesis. E.g., gender, age, income, or
         "None" if there is no interacting variable.

         - Relations: Interactions between a given set of variables under a given
         context to produce the sub-hypothesis. E.g., “quadratic relationship”,
         “inversely proportional”, piecewise conditionals, or "None" if there is no
         interacting relationship.

         Make sure to only use the information present in the hypothesis and the
         workflow. Do not add any new information.
         If no sub-hypotheses can be extracted, return an empty list.

         Here is the metadata for the task:
         ```json
         {{
             "datasets": {dataset_metadata},
             "hypothesis": "{hypothesis}",
             "workflow": "{workflow}"
         }}
         ```

         Return your answer as a JSON object in the following format:
         ```json
         {{
         "sub_hypo": [
             {{
                 "text": the sub-hypothesis in natural language,
                 "context": a short text description of the context of the
                 sub-hypothesis,
                 "variables": a list of columns involved in the sub-hypothesis,
                 "relations": a short text description of the relationship between
                 the variables of the sub-hypothesis,
                 "explanation": a short text explanation for the breakdown of the
                 sub-hypothesis
             }},
             ...
         ]
         }}```
         """




                                              18
Listing 2 Matching prompt to match contexts of two sub-hypotheses.

matching_prompt = f"""
        Given a gold hypothesis, a gold context, a predicted hypothesis, and a
        predicted context, your task is
        to determine if the predicted context semantically matches the
        ground-truth context.

         Here is the definition for Context: Boundary conditions that limit the
         scope of a sub-hypothesis. E.g., “for men over the age of 30”, “in Asia
         and Europe”, or "None" if there is no boundary condition specified.

         If the predicted context matches the gold context, return true, otherwise
         return false.

         Here is the metadata for the task:
         ```json
         {{
             "gold_hypothesis": "{gold_hypotheis}",
             "gold_context": "{gold_context}",
             "predicted_hypothesis": "{pred_hypothesis}",
             "predicted_context": "{pred_context}"
         }}
         ```

         Return your answer as a JSON object in the following format:
         ```json
         {{
             "match": true or false
         }}
         ```"""




                                              19
Listing 3 Prompt for variable alignment between two sub-hypotheses.

main_context = f"""
        You are going to compare two natural-language hypotheses HypoA and HypoB
        accompanied with optional workflows: WorkflowA for HypoA and WorkflowB for
        HypoB.
        Both the hypotheses answer the natural language query "QUERY" over the
        dataset(s) described by dataset description(s) and column description(s)
        below.
        Compare HypoA and HypoB in terms of three aspects: Contexts, Variables,
        and Relations.
        E.g., for the hypothesis "From 1995 to 2009, the number of sandhill cranes
        around the tundra (Indigilka River) surged by an astounding ~10X":
        * Contexts refer to the stratification of the data under which the given
        hypothesis is True. E.g., "For all women", "From 1995 to 2009".
        * Variables refer to the set of variables (either dependent or independent)
        that are mentioned in the hypothesis. E.g., number of sandhill cranes,
        location.
        * Relations refer to the form of relation between the variables. E.g.,
        "surged by ~10x".

         Answer the following questions for a given pair of hypotheses, HypoA and
         HypoB, along with an explanation grounded on the QUERY and the DATASET(S).

         Here is the metadata for the task:
         ```json
         {{
         "datasets": {datasets_json},
         "query": {query},
         "HypoA": {gold_hypo},
         "WorkflowA": {gold_workflow},
         "HypoB": {gen_hypo},
         "WorkflowB": {gen_workflow}
         }}
         ```

        {variable_question}"""
variable_question = """\
        Question: For both HypoA and HypoB, what are the different variables found
        in the hypotheses? \
        Return your answer as a JSON object in the following format:
        ```json
        {{
        "sizeA": num of variables used in HypoA
        "sizeB": num of variables used in HypoB
        "intersection": num of variables common in HypoA and HypoB. Use *fuzzy
        matching* to determine intersection, accounting for paraphrases or
        slightly different surface forms
        "explanation": a short text explanation about the variables
        }}```
        Answer:"""




                                              20
Listing 4 Prompt for relationship alignment between two sub-hypotheses.

main_context = f"""
        You are going to compare two natural-language hypotheses HypoA and HypoB
        accompanied with optional workflows: WorkflowA for HypoA and WorkflowB for
        HypoB.
        Both the hypotheses answer the natural language query "QUERY" over the
        dataset(s) described by dataset description(s) and column description(s)
        below.
        Compare HypoA and HypoB in terms of three aspects: Contexts, Variables,
        and Relations.
        E.g., for the hypothesis "From 1995 to 2009, the number of sandhill cranes
        around the tundra (Indigilka River) surged by an astounding ~10X":
        * Contexts refer to the stratification of the data under which the given
        hypothesis is True. E.g., "For all women", "From 1995 to 2009".
        * Variables refer to the set of variables (either dependent or independent)
        that are mentioned in the hypothesis. E.g., number of sandhill cranes,
        location.
        * Relations refer to the form of relation between the variables. E.g.,
        "surged by ~10x".

         Answer the following questions for a given pair of hypotheses, HypoA and
         HypoB, along with an explanation grounded on the QUERY and the DATASET(S).

         Here is the metadata for the task:
         ```json
         {{
         "datasets": {datasets_json},
         "query": {query},
         "HypoA": {gold_hypo},
         "WorkflowA": {gold_workflow},
         "HypoB": {gen_hypo},
         "WorkflowB": {gen_workflow}
         }}
         ```

        {variable_question}"""
dimension_question = """
        Question: Does HypoB exhibit the same relation as HypoA?
        Compare using the following example hierarchy of relationships (based on
        specificity): \
        "there exists a relationship" > "positive relationship" > "positive AND
        (linear OR quadratic)" > "positive AND linear."
        Options: A) very similar B) similar but general than HypoA C) different
        Return your answer as a JSON object in the following format:
        ```json
        {{
        "answer": one of the options from A) very similar B) similar but general
        than HypoA C) different
        "explanation": a short text explanation about the relationship comparison
        }}```
        Answer:"""




                                              21
